Source: https://www.commerce.gov.in/files/2025-08/Commerce_AR-2024-25-English-1.pdf
Title: 
Fetched: 2026-09-19T10:31:34.821Z
Truncated: continue from startIndex 250000

ANNUAL REPORT

Department of Commerce

---



---

CONTENTS

Overview ..... 2

1. Organisational Structure and Functions ..... 9

2. Global Economic and Trade Situation ..... 27

3. Trends in India’s Foreign Trade ..... 32

4. Foreign Trade Policy and Major Schemes ..... 45

5. Export Promotion Mechanism ..... 68

6. Commercial Relations, Trade Agreements and International Trade Organizations ..... 101

7. Special Economic Zones (SEZs) and Export Oriented Units (EOUs) ..... 137

8. Specialized Agencies ..... 146

9. Programmes undertaken for the Welfare of SCs/STs/OBCs, EWSs, Women and Persons with Disabilities ..... 201

10. Transparency, Public Facilitation and Allied Activities ..... 210

Annexures ..... 221

---

OVERVIEW

---

1. GLOBAL ECONOMY

The global economy remains resilient with steady 
growth despite multiple challenges in the recent 
years. The path has been turbulent, beginning with 
pandemic-induced supply-chain disruptions followed 
by geo-political conflicts and extreme weather events 
which led to a worldwide food and energy crises, 
a significant spike in inflation, and tightening of 
monetary policy. Global growth is expected to remain 
below historical standards on account of the longterm effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, geo-political 
conflict, the slow rise in productivity, and the growing 
geo-economics fragmentation. As per International 
1
Monetary Fund (IMF) 2024, global growth is 
estimated at 3.3 per cent in 2023 and is projected to 
slow down during 2024 and 2025 at the same rate 
of 3.2 per cent, respectively. However, in comparison 
to the pre-pandemic average, the recent prediction 
for global growth in five years at 3.1 per cent still 
remains below normal. Persistent structural barriers 
such as ageing population and low productivity are 
major detriments to many economies impeding their 
maximum potential growth.

The aggregate output of the Advanced Economies 
(AEs) is expected to rise from 1.7 per cent in 2023 
to 1.8 per cent in 2024 and 2025, respectively. In 
contrast, the aggregate output of Emerging Market 
and Developing Economies (EMDEs) is expected 
to grow by 4.2 per cent both in 2024 and 2025, as 
compared to 4.4 per cent in 2023.

2. GLOBAL TRADE

Global trade has slowed down more than anticipated 
in 2023, as the global economy faces a challenging 
and uncertain environment. Global merchandise 
trade turned upwards in the first half of 2024 with a 
2.3 per cent year-on-year increase, which should be 
followed by further moderate expansion in the rest 
of the year and in 2025. The rebound comes on the 
heels of a slump in 2023 driven by high inflation and 
rising interest rates.

2
As per World Trade Organization (WTO), world

merchandise trade volume is expected to grow at 
2.7 per cent in 2024 and 3.0 per cent in 2025, as 
compared to (-) 1.1 per cent in 2023.  The 2.7 per cent 
growth in merchandise trade in 2024 is a significant 
upgrade as compared to the WTO’s forecast of April 
2024, which projected a growth of 2.6 per cent. 
Global trade, however, has displayed remarkable 
resilience over the past few years despite continuous 
shocks including COVID-19 pandemic, supply chain 
disruptions and the geo-political uncertainties. Trade 
patterns have varied across regions/countries.

On the export side, in 2024, Asia is expected to 
register the strongest growth of 7.4 per cent and 
followed by Middle East at 4.7 per cent and South 
America at 4.6 per cent. All other regions are expected 
to see positive export growth except Europe where 
exports are expected to contract by 1.4 per cent.  On 
the import side, in 2024, Middle East is expected to 
record the strongest import growth of 9.0 per cent, 
followed by South America at 5.6 per cent and Asia 
at 4.3 per cent. Other regions are expected to see 
modest growth except Europe where imports are 
expected to contract by 2.3 per cent.

3. INDIA’S MERCHANDISE TRADE

The ongoing geo-political headwinds have impacted 
India’s merchandise exports in 2023-24 resulting 
in a slight decline of (-) 3.10 per cent in exports to 
US$ 437.07 billion from the previous year’s high of 
US$ 451.07 billion. However, the non-petroleum and 
non-gems & jewellery exports have shown resilience 
and escalated from US$ 315.64 billion in 2022-23 
to US$ 320.21 billion in 2023-24, which is a positive 
growth of 1.45 per cent. Merchandise exports for the 
period April-December 2024 were US$ 321.71 billion 
as compared to US$ 316.65 billion during April-
December 2023, registering a positive growth of 1.60 
per cent.

---

v	 Merchandise imports also declined from US$ 
715.97 billion in 2022-23 to US$ 678.21 billion 
in 2023-24, registering a negative growth of 
(-) 5.27 percent. Merchandise imports for the 
period April-December 2024 were US$ 532.48 
billion as compared to US$ 506.39 billion 
during April-December 2023, registering a 
growth of 5.15 per cent.

v	 Merchandise trade deficit narrowed down 
from US$ 264.90 billion in 2022-23 to US$ 
241.14 billion in 2023-24. Merchandise trade 
deficit stood at US$ 210.77 billion during April-
December 2024 as compared to US$ 189.74 
billion during April-December 2023.

4. INDIA’S SERVICES TRADE

India has been a major player in services trade and is 
among the top ten services exporting countries. India’s 
services exports have experienced a phenomenal 
trajectory in commercial exports over the years in the 
global market. From 2014 to 2023, India’s services 
exports surged from US$ 156.61 billion to US$ 336.92 
billion, showcasing an impressive Compound Annual 
Growth Rate (CAGR) of 8.88 per cent. During the 
th th
same period, India’s rank has improved from 8 to 7, 
maintaining its position as a key player among global 
competitors.

v	 Services imports were recorded at US$ 178.31 
billion in 2023-24 as compared to US$ 182.05 
billion in 2022-23, a decline of (-) 2.05 per 
cent. Service imports during April-December 
2024 stood at US$ 149.67 billion, registering 
a growth of 13.69 per cent vis-à-vis April-
December 2023 (US$ 131.64 billion).

2022-23. Services trade surplus stood at US$ 
131.27 billion during April-December 2024 as 
compared to US$ 120.07 billion during April-
December 2023.

5. ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
COMMERCE DURING 2024 (JANUARY - 
DECEMBER 2024)

v	 The second edition of Bharat Mobility Global 
th nd
Expo, 2025 was organized from 17-22
January 2025 on a much larger scale across 
three venues in Delhi. It is an industry led 
event and supported by Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry and Ministry of Heavy Industries.  
Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi 
inaugurated the Bharat Mobility Global Expo 
2025 in Bharat Mandapam.

v	 The Expo underscored India’s commitment 
to reshaping global mobility with a focus on 
innovation, sustainability, and inclusivity. More 
than 9.8 lakh visitors witnessed the Expo across 
the three  venues during the Expo. Germany, 
UK, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan had 
their Pavilions and further, individual country 
exhibitors from Ireland, Spain, Thailand and 
USA also participated in the Expo.

v	 India-European Union (EU) Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) negotiations were formally 
th
re-launched on 17 June 2022 as follow up 
of India-EU Leaders announcement in Porto 
th
on 8 May 2021. Negotiations cover 23 policy 
areas/chapters. Nine Rounds of negotiations 
have been held till September, 2024.

v	 Consequent to the meeting of Hon’ble Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi and the Prime 
Minister of the United Kingdom H.E. Sir Keir 
Starmer on the sidelines of the G-20 Summit 
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, the UK announced 
the relaunch of the India-UK Free Trade talks 
early next year. The UK and India will continue 
to negotiate towards a comprehensive and 
ambitious Free Trade Agreement.
th
v	 The 14 Round of Economic and Technology

th
v	 The 14 Round of Economic and Technology 
Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) negotiations 
between Sri Lanka and India took place from

$$
8 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$ th th
24-26 July 2024 in Colombo, Sri Lanka. Most 
of the tracks are finalised except the trade in 
goods.

$$
2 4 ^ {\mathrm {t h}} - 2 6 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

v	 India is negotiating a Trade Agreement with 
Peru covering trade in goods & services. The 
th th
6 and the 7 round of negotiations were 
th th th th
held from 12 - 14 February 2024 and 8-11
April 2024 respectively. Both sides aimed at 
understanding priorities and concerns of each 
other, ensuring that the negotiations were 
rooted in mutual respect and benefit.

$$
\&
$$

$$
6 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
7 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
1 2 ^ {\mathrm {t h}} - 1 4 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
8 ^ {\mathrm {t h}} - 1 1 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

st
v	 The 21 ASEAN-India Economic Ministers’ 
th
meeting was held on 20 September 2024 in 
Vientiane, Lao PDR.   The Economic Ministers 
or their representatives from all the 10 ASEAN 
countries viz. Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, 
Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Vietnam participated in the 
meeting. Discussions were held on the issue 
of substantial conclusion of the ASEAN India 
Trade in Goods Agreement (AITIGA) Review 
negotiations by 2025.

$$
2 1 ^ {\mathrm {s t}}
$$

$$
2 0 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

v	 During year 2024, four rounds of AITIGA 
rd th
negotiation were held. The 3 & 6 AITIGA 
Joint Committee (JC) and related meetings 
have been held in India in February 2024 and 
th th
November 2024 respectively. The 4 & 5
AITIGA JC was held in Putrajaya, Malaysia in 
May 2024 and in Jakarta, Indonesia during 
July-August 2024 respectively. JC is working 
towards making AITIGA more effective, userfriendly, simple, and trade facilitative for 
businesses. The review will target addressing 
injury to industries from the existing AITIGA 
and the inequitable tariff liberalization by all 
the partner countries. The review is targeted to 
conclude in 2025. 
th
v	 The 8 meeting of India-Myanmar Joint Trade

$$
3 ^ {\mathrm {r d}}
$$

$$
6 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
4 ^ {\mathrm {t h}} \& 5 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
2 7 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

collaboration. The discussion also touched on 
how this cooperation could lead to long-term 
benefits, helping both the countries to achieve 
their goals more effectively while fostering a 
spirit of mutual support and collaboration.

v	 India is also engaged in negotiations on 
a Comprehensive Economic Cooperation 
Agreement (CECA) with Australia building 
upon the market access commitments in Trade 
in Services under India- Australia Economic 
Cooperation Trade Agreement (ECTA).

th
v	 The 9 meeting of India-Taiwan Working 
Group on Trade (JS-DG level) was held on 
th
8 July 2024 to discuss the issues related to 
market access, non-tariff barriers, supply chain 
diversification, etc. During the meeting, the 
operationalization date of Mutual Recognition 
Agreement signed between India and Taiwan 
th
was decided as 8 July 2024.

$$
9 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
8 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

th
v	 CSLM between Indian and Bhutan held on 27-
th
28 September 2024. The trade between India 
and Bhutan is governed by Agreement on 
Trade, Commerce and Transit, which prescribes 
free trade between the two countries. No basic 
customs duty is levied on import of any product 
from Bhutan or export to Bhutan. Further, 
the trade is carried out in Indian Rupees and 
Bhutanese currency (Ngultrum).

$$
1 ^ {\mathrm {s t}}
$$

v	 In the Ministerial Conference 13 (MC-13) of the 
th st
WTO held from 26 February to 1  March 2024 
in Abu Dhabi, UAE, the following interventions 
were made during the Ministerial Conference:
	 Ø	 In the Ministerial Conversation on Trade

$$
2 6 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

Ø	 In the Ministerial Conversation on Trade 
and Sustainable Development, including 
Trade and Industrial Policy and Policy 
Space for Industrial Development, it was 
submitted that India is cognizant of its 
responsibilities. India has put forward 
and propagated a sustainable way of 
living based on traditions and values of 
conservation and moderation including 
through a mass movement for LiFE- 
“Life Style for Environment” as a key to 
combating climate change.

---

Ø	 With respect to Ministerial Conversation 
on Trade and Inclusion, it was submitted 
that India do not share the enthusiasm 
of proponents to widen the remit of 
the WTO, in disregard to the treaty 
provisions, to launch new discussion 
on distributional issues in WTO and 
that this would be an overreach of the 
WTO to the domestic policy space of 
Members.

Ø	 Further, India reiterated that it does not 
support the linking of trade with social issues 
like women economic empowerment and 
those concerning MSMEs because these 
are best addressed under the appropriate 
international conventions.

Ø	 A paragraph has been incorporated in 
Draft Abu Dhabi Ministerial Declaration 
on the recognition of the role of 
(Multilateral Trading System) MTS 
towards the achievement of UN 2030 
agenda and its SDGs in so far as they 
relate to the WTO mandate. The outcome 
was in line with the India’s position.

Ø	 India’s paper on Technology transfer 
and transfer of know-how in the context 
of environmentally sound technologies 
elicited interventions in the committee 
of trade and environment (CTE) from 
member countries. The roadmap 
suggested in our paper could form 
the basis for a possible Ministerial 
Declaration in MC14 on environmental 
sound technologies/climate resilient 
technologies.

v	 The upgrade negotiations for India Korea CEPA 
th
were initiated in 2016 and so far 11 round of 
negotiations have been held with last round 
held in Seoul in July 2024. The Sub-Groups 
and Joint Working Groups constituted under 
the institutional mechanism of India-Korea 
CEPA are discussing issues related to market 
access, investment, rules of origin, sanitary and 
phytosanitary measures and technical barriers 
to trade in the upgrade negotiations.

$$
1 9 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
3 ^ {\mathrm {r d}}
$$

nd
v	 The 2 meeting of JWGTI was hosted by India 
th
in Vanijya Bhawan, New Delhi on 19 June 
2024. The meeting discussed various measures 
to improve the value and the quantum of trade 
and to promote investment. Both the sides 
were unanimous on the need for having more 
interaction for concrete mutual benefits.

$$
2 ^ {\mathrm {n d}}
$$

$$
2 9 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

v	 A Joint Trade Committee meeting with Nigeria 
th th
was held during 29 and 30 April 2024. The 
comprehensive dialogue undertook a detailed 
review of recent developments in bilateral trade 
and investment ties and acknowledged the 
vast untapped potential for further expansion. 
Both sides agreed to the early conclusion of the 
Local Currency Settlement System Agreement.

v	 The sixth Session of India-Egypt Joint Trade 
Committee (JTC) was held in New Delhi 
th th
from 16-17 September 2024. Indian side 
informed that necessary approvals for signing 
the MoU on cooperation between National 
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) of India 
and MSME Development Agency (MSMEDA) 
of Egypt have been obtained. Both sides 
expressed their desire for an early signing 
and operationalization. Both sides identified 
several areas of focus for enhancing bilateral 
cooperation in trade and investment including 
that in the Suez Canal Economic Zone (SCEZ), 
pharmaceuticals and health sector, gems & 
jewellery, engineering goods, petroleum and 
mining, MSME Sector, customs matters, services 
sector, IT services, electronics manufacturing, 
apparel manufacturing, renewable energy - 
green hydrogen, food security, international 
trade settlement and digital payments, 
transport and trade disputes etc.

---

6. INITIATIVES TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT 
OF COMMERCE TO BOOST INDIA’S 
EXPORTS

The Department of Commerce continues to take a 
number of steps to boost exports. Some of the major 
steps taken are as follows:

st 
v	 New Foreign Trade Policy was launched on 31
st
March 2023 and it came into effect from 1 April 
2023. The aim of the new FTP 2023 initiatives 
is to establish a predictable and equitable 
environment, promote best and sustainable 
trade practices, achieve deeper, wider, and 
more value-added penetration into global 
markets, enhance efficiency and ease of doing 
business by reducing transaction costs, and 
integrate India into the global value chains.

v	 Assistance provided through several 
schemes to promote exports, namely, Trade 
Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES) and 
Market Access Initiatives (MAI) Scheme.

v	 Interest Equalization Scheme on pre and 
post shipment rupee export credit  has been 
st
extended by three months up to 31 December 
2024. The scheme has been formulated to give 
the benefit in the interest rates being charged 
by the banks to the exporters on their Pre and 
Post Shipment Rupee Export Credits.

v	 The Department of Commerce through DGFT 
is working with the States and the districts to 
channelise the potential and diverse identity 
in each district of our country to make them 
export hubs.

v	 Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported 
Products (RoDTEP) scheme which was notified 
th 
till 30 September, 2024 has been extended 
th
till 30 September 2025. The scheme creates 
a mechanism for reimbursement of taxes, 
duties and levies, which are currently not 
being refunded under any other mechanism, 
at the central, state and local level, but are 
incurred by the export entities in the process 
of manufacture and distribution of exported 
products.

v	 In the Union Budget 2024-25, the Government

proposed the establishment of E-Commerce 
Export Hubs (ECEHs) to empower MSMEs 
and traditional artisans to access international 
markets. These hubs will operate under a 
seamless regulatory and logistics framework 
and provide comprehensive trade and exportrelated services, including warehousing, 
packaging, labelling, certification, logistics, 
and returns management for cross-border 
e-commerce.

v	 For Technology Upgradation for Boosting 
Engineering Exports, EEPC India Technology 
Centre has provided various Technological 
solutions to their MSME members by Additive 
Technology and Reverse Engineering through 
initiatives taken up by 3D Design and 
Development Centre.

v	 DGFT launched the online JanSunwai Facility 
th
on 13 September 2024 for empowering trade 
by providing transparency.

v	 DGFT has launched upgraded version of a 
new system for generating Electronic Bank 
th
Realisation Certificates (eBRC) system on 15
November, 2023 that eliminates the need for 
paper and associated costs.

v	 The Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) Schemes 
for 14 key sectors, with an outlay of Rs. 1.97 
lakh crore, aim to enhance manufacturing 
capabilities and exports.

v	 General Administration of Customs (GACC) has 
granted market access for the export of key 
fish species which are of high value, from India 
including Pampus chinensis (Chinese pomfret), 
Pampus argenteus (silver pomfret), and Scylla 
serrata (mud crab).
v	 Listing of Milk and Milk products, Egg and Egg

v	 Listing of Milk and Milk products, Egg and Egg 
Products and Fish and Fishery Establishment 
by Russia. Based on credible inspection and 
certification protocol of EIC, Russian authorities 
approved four establishments for milk and milk 
products, two establishments of egg and egg 
products, and two establishments for fish and 
fishery. This achievement highlights India’s 
increasing credibility in adhering to strict 
international food safety and quality standards.

---

v	 IPEF agreements for Pillar III (Clean economy), 
Pillar IV (Fair economy) and overarching 
st
agreement signed on 21 September, 2024.

v	 Bharat Mart, a global trade hub for Indian 
exporters launched in Dubai. It provides Indian 
MSMEs affordable access to Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC), African, and CIS markets, 
enhancing exports to these regions.

v	 Lab-Grown Diamond Project started by IIT-
Madras for indigenous production under the 
‘Make in India’ initiative.

v	 Trade Connect e-platform, a single window 
initiative to help exporters, MSME’s access new 
markets launched.

v	 GeM registers 1.69 lakh women-led MSMEs, 
empowering women in Government 
procurement process.

th
v	 Launch of Aabhar Collection: On 11 July 
2024, GeM launched its signature initiative 
called “The Aabhar Collection” as part of its 
#Vocalforlocal outlet store marketplace. The 
Aabhar collection showcases over 120 exquisite 
and hand-crafted gift items and hampers, 
featuring select products from One District One 
Product (ODOP) and Geographical Indication 
(GI) categories with prices ranging from Rs. 
500 to Rs. 25,000 to be used by Government 
Buyers for all their official events/ ceremonies 
etc

v	 India signed the Trade and Economic 
Partnership Agreement (TEPA) with European 
th
Free Trade Association (EFTA) on 10 March 
2024. Under TEPA, EFTA has committed

to promote foreign direct investments by 
US$ 100 billion in India in the next 15 years, 
and to facilitate the generation of million 
direct employments in India, through such 
investments.

v	 National Programme of Organic Production 
(NPOP) is set to benefit approximately 20 lakh 
farmers from 5,000 grower groups through 
enhanced export opportunities. It is expected 
to drive organic exports beyond US$ 1 billion 
by 2025-26, benefiting approximately 20 lakh 
farmers.

v	 Issues of particular interest at multilateral 
trade negotiations including Agriculture, 
Public Stockholding (PSH) for Food Security 
Purposes, Fisheries Subsidies Agreement and 
other significant negotiations at the WTO 
that directly impact India’s interests, were 
deliberated.

v	 A Retreat with the officers of the Commercial 
Wings of Indian Missions in 20 identified 
countries of significance to enhance India’s 
th
export potential was organized from 6 to 
th
8  January 2025 in New Delhi.

Ø	 The 20 countries, were Australia, Brazil, 
Bangladesh, China, France, Germany, 
Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Netherland, 
Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Saudi 
Arabia, South Korea, Türkiye, UAE, 
United Kingdom, USA and Vietnam.  
Ø	 The Retreat served as a pivotal platform

Ø	 The Retreat served as a pivotal platform 
to deliberate on pressing challenges and 
future opportunities in promoting India’s 
export growth and to make concerted 
efforts to align strategic initiatives 
tailored for enhancing India’s presence 
in global markets amidst the complexity 
of international trade dynamics.

Ø	 The retreat also highlighted the “Eyes 
and Ears Framework” for Mission Abroad 
and EPCs, outlining action points 
and Key Performance Indicators for 
Market Intelligence, Capacity Building, 
Event Collaboration, and Strategic 
Planning.  The strategies include 
promoting advanced technologies, 
marketing “Brand India”, providing 
access to international quality standards, 
and ensuring importers’ availability.

These initiatives underline the Government’s 
dedication to expanding India’s trade and fostering 
inclusive development, positioning India as a global 
economic powerhouse by 2047.

---

ORGANIZATIONAL 
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS

---

1. VISION AND MISSION

The long-term vision of the Department is to leverage 
trade for economic growth, make India a major player 
in the world trade, and assume a leadership role in 
international organizations, commensurate with 
India’s growing importance. The policy tools adopted 
involve focusing on goods, services and countries 
through targeted interventions.

2.       FUNCTIONS

The Department formulates implements and monitors 
the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) which provides the 
basic framework and strategy to be followed. The 
Trade Policy is periodically reviewed to incorporate 
changes necessary to take care of emerging economic 
scenarios both domestic and international. Besides, 
the Department is also entrusted with responsibilities 
relating to multilateral and bilateral commercial 
relations, Special Economic Zones, state trading, 
export promotion and trade facilitation, development 
and regulation of certain export-oriented industries 
and commodities.

The Department is functionally organized into the 
following Nine Wings/Divisions:

v	 Trade Negotiation Wing - Bilateral

v	 Trade Negotiation Wing - Multilateral

v	 Territorial, Commodity & Products Wing

There are two Attached Offices, ten Subordinate 
Offices, ten Autonomous Bodies, five Public Sector 
Undertakings, one Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)

v	 Supply Division

namely GeM, thirteen Export Promotion Councils, 
one Advisory Body  namely BOT and four Other 
Organizations under the administrative control of 
the Department. A complete list of these offices/
organizations along with the postal addresses is 
given at Annexure A.

v	 Trade Policy Wing

The broad organizational set up and major role 
and functions of the offices/organizations under 
the administrative control of the Department are 
discussed below:

(i) Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT)

(A) Attached Offices

Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) is an 
attached office of the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry which is headed by the Director General 
of Foreign Trade. Since 1991, the liberalization in the 
economic policies of the Government took place, 
this organization has been essentially involved in the 
regulation and promotion of Foreign Trade. Keeping 
in line with liberalization and globalization and the 
overall objective of increasing exports, DGFT has 
since been assigned the role of a “facilitator”. The 
shift was from restrictions and control of imports/
exports to promotion and facilitation of exports/
imports, keeping in view the interests of the country.

This Directorate, with headquarters at New Delhi, 
assists Government in formulation of Foreign Trade 
Policy and is responsible for implementing the Foreign 
Trade Policy and Schemes under the FTP with the 
main objective of promoting India’s exports. Further, 
it is responsible for implementation of Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 and Rules 
and Regulations notified there under. DGFT also 
issues authorizations to exporters/importers and 
monitors their corresponding obligations through a 
network of 24 Regional Offices. The regional offices 
are located at the following places:

| S. No. | Regional Office | S. No. | Regional Office |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Ahmedabad | 14 | Ludhiana |
| 2 | Bangalore | 15 | Mumbai |
| 3 | Bhopal* | 16 | Nagpur |
| 4 | Chennai | 17 | New Delhi(CLA) |
| 5 | Coimbatore | 18 | Panipat |
| 6 | Guwahati | 19 | Pune |
| 7 | Hyderabad | 20 | Rajkot |
| 8 | Indore | 21 | Srinagar |
| 9 | Jaipur | 22 | Surat |
| 10 | Jammu | 23 | Varanasi |
| 11 | Kanpur | 24 | Vishakhapatnam |
| 12 | Ernakulum(Cochin) | 25 | Vadodara |
| 13 | Kolkata |  |  |

*In compliance with the Order dated 04.10.2019 of the Hon’ble 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh Principal seat at Jabalpur in 
W.P. 21039/2019, status quo on Regional Office of DGFT at 
Bhopal is maintained subject to final/further orders.

The regional offices provide facilitation to exporters 
in regard to developments in International Trade i.e. 
WTO Agreements, Rules of Origin and anti-dumping 
issues etc. in their import and export decisions in the 
international dynamic environment.

(ii) Directorate General of Trade Remedies 
(DGTR)

Recognizing that State Governments are key 
stakeholders in promotion of exports, Department 
of Commerce (DoC) is now actively engaging with 
them for promoting exports. DoC has advised State 
Governments to constitute State Export Promotion 
Committees, under the chairmanship of Chief 
Secretaries, for focusing on export promotion wherein 
Regional Authorities of DGFT are the co-conveners. 
Nodal Officers at the rank of Additional Secretary/
Joint Secretary from DoC have been appointed to 
attend the meetings of the State Export Promotion 
Committee. State Export Promotion Committees 
have been constituted in all the States/UTs. These 
committees are overseeing the formulation and 
implementation of State Export Promotion Strategies 
in consultation with Export Promotion Councils and 
Regional Authorities of DGFT.

which was formed in 1997 has been restructured 
as DGTR in May 2018 by restructuring and redesigning DGAD into DGTR by incorporating all the 
trade remedial functions i.e. Anti-Dumping Duty 
(ADD), Countervailing Duty (CVD), Safeguards 
Duty (SGD) and Safeguards Measures (QRs) under 
a single window framework. Thus, the DGTR has 
been formed by merging of functions of DGAD, 
Department of Commerce, Directorate General of 
Safeguards, Department of Revenue and Safeguards 
(QR) functions of DGFT into its fold. The DGTR is a 
professionally integrated organization with multispectrum skill sets emanating from officers drawn 
from different services and specializations. The DGTR 
does trade remedy investigations, which are quasijudicial in nature, before making its recommendations 
to the Central Government.

It is the single national authority for administering 
all trade remedial measures including anti-dumping, 
countervailing duties and safeguard measures. The 
DGTR provides a level playing field to the domestic 
industry against the adverse impact of the unfair 
trade practices like dumping and actionable subsidies 
from any exporting country, by using trade remedial 
methods under the relevant framework of the WTO 
arrangements, the Customs Tariff Act & Rules and 
other relevant laws and international agreements, 
in a transparent and time bound manner. It also 
provides trade defence support to our domestic 
industry and exporters in dealing with instances of 
trade remedy investigations instituted against them 
by other countries.

(B) Subordinate Offices

(i) Directorate General of Commercial 
Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S)

The Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence 
& Statistics (DGCI&S) is the premier organization 
of Government of India for collection, compilation 
and dissemination of India’s trade statistics and 
commercial information. The Directorate, headed 
by a Director General, has its office at Kolkata and is 
responsible for collecting, compiling and publishing/
disseminating trade statistics and various types 
of commercial information required by the policy 
makers, researchers, importers, exporters, traders 
as well as overseas buyers. It is the first large scale data processing organization functioning as a 
nodal agency for export & import data, with an 
ISO certification 9001:2015 for compilation and 
dissemination of India’s foreign trade statistics.

(ii) Special Economic Zones (SEZs)

The main objectives of the SEZ Scheme are generation 
of additional economic activity, promotion of exports 
of goods and services, promotion of investment from 
domestic and foreign sources, creation of employment 
opportunities along with the development of 
infrastructure facilities. All laws of India are applicable 
in SEZs unless specifically exempted as per the SEZ 
Act/Rules. Each Zone is headed by a Development 
Commissioner and is administered as per the SEZ 
Act, 2005 and SEZ Rules, 2006. Units may be set up 
in the SEZ for manufacturing, trading or for service 
activity. The units in the SEZs have to be net foreign 
exchange earners but they are not subjected to 
any predetermined value addition (except Gems & 
Jewellery Units) or minimum export performance 
requirements. Sales in the Domestic Tariff Area from 
the SEZ units are treated as if the goods are being 
imported and are subject to payment of applicable 
customs duties.

The payment and accounting of the Supply Division, 
including of DGS&D are performed by the office of 
Chief Controller of Accounts (Supply Division) under

Chief Controller of Accounts (Supply Division) under 
the Departmentalized Accounting System, through 
its Regional Pay and Accounts offices at New Delhi, 
Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai. Consequent upon 
Union Cabinet’s Decision to close the DGS&D w.e.f. 
st
31 October 2017, the office of CCA (Supply) has 
been discontinued and residual works are now being 
handled by the CCA (Commerce) with the skeletal 
staff and 01 PAOs, in New Delhi. The work of RPAO 
(Supply), Mumbai and RPAO (Supply), Kolkata and 
RPAO (Supply), Chennai has been overtaken by RPAO

Chief Controller of Accounts (Supply Division) under 
the Departmentalized Accounting System, through 
its Regional Pay and Accounts offices at New Delhi, 
Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai. Consequent upon 
Union Cabinet’s Decision to close the DGS&D w.e.f. 
 October 2017, the office of CCA (Supply) has 
been discontinued and residual works are now being 
handled by the CCA (Commerce) with the skeletal 
staff and 01 PAOs, in New Delhi. The work of RPAO 
(Supply), Mumbai and RPAO (Supply), Kolkata and 
RPAO (Supply), Chennai has been overtaken by RPAO

RPAO (Supply), Chennai has been overtaken by RPAO

(iii) Pay and Accounts Office (Supply)

(iv) Pay and Accounts Office (Commerce & 
Textiles)

(Commerce), Mumbai, RPAO (Commerce), Kolkata 
and RPAO (Commerce), Chennai respectively.

The Secretary, as Chief Accounting Authority in the 
Department of Commerce, performs the functions 
of the Department related to finance and accounts 
with the assistance of the Financial Adviser and Chief 
Controller of Accounts.

There is a common Accounting Wing for both the 
Department of Commerce & Ministry of Textiles. The 
Accounts Wing, Department of Commerce functions 
under the supervision of Chief Controller of Accounts 
(CCA) who is assisted by a Controller of Accounts 
(CA), Deputy Controller of Accounts (DCA), Assistant 
Controller of Accounts (ACA) and 05 Pay and 
Accounts Offices (PAOs) (2 PAOs in Delhi and one 
each at Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata and 01 PAO 
of Supply in Delhi.  The responsibility of the Budget 
Division of the Ministry is also entrusted to the CCA.  
CCA extends all assistance to Financial Advisor in 
budgeting, monitoring & control of expenditure, 
renders professional expertise in matters related 
to financial management system, preparation of 
disclosure statements as required under FRBM Act, 
annual Finance Accounts, Appropriation Accounts, 
estimation & flow of non-tax revenue receipts, etc.

The functions of the accounting wing include payment 
of claims, accounting transactions, consolidation of 
accounts and other related matters like finalization & 
payment of pension, revision of pension with the help 
of Drawing & Disbursing Officers (DDOs) & payment 
of final GPF cases, loan & advance, Grants-in-Aid, 
maintenance of General Provident Fund (GPF), New 
Pension System (NPS), Leave Salary Contribution 
& Pension Contribution (LSC & PC), etc.  Further, 
implementation and smooth functioning of PFMS 
in various entities is also coordinated by the Office 
of CCA along with monitoring of smooth working 
of PFMS modules, viz. EIS, EAT, Pension, GPF, NTRP, 
LOA, etc. The Office of CCA also proactively assists 
the Department in onboarding of various Central 
Sector Schemes on the Central Nodal Agency system 
of fund flow as prescribed by the Ministry of Finance.

---

of the Department of Commerce, which handles the 
internal audit work of the Departments involving 
120 units under the Department.  The role of internal 
audit is to study the accounting and implementation 
of prescribed procedure with a view to ensure that 
they are correct & adequate.

(i) Coffee Board

(C) Autonomous Bodies

The Coffee Board is a statutory organization under 
the control of Ministry of Commerce & Industry, 
Government of India constituted under the Coffee Act 
1942, an Act enacted by the Parliament. The Board 
comprises 33 members including a non-Executive 
Chairman, the Secretary, who is the Chief Executive 
appointed by the Government of India, and remaining 
31 members comprising Members of the Parliament, 
Official members representing the interest of Coffee 
Growing States and members representing various 
interests of the Coffee Industry. The Coffee Board 
focuses its activities in the areas of research, extension, 
development, market intelligence, external & internal 
promotion and labour welfare measures. The Coffee 
Board functions with its Head Office in Bengaluru. 
The Central Coffee Research Institute (CCRI) at 
Balehonnuru, Chikkamagaluru District, Karnataka is 
the headquarters of the Research Department with 
a Sub-Station at Chettalli (Karnataka) and Regional 
Research Stations at Chundale (Kerala), Thandigudi 
(Tamil Nadu), Narasipatnam (Andhra Pradesh) and 
Diphu (Assam).  The Extension network is spread 
over the traditional coffee growing areas (Karnataka, 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu), Non-Traditional Areas 
(Andhra Pradesh and Odisha) and North Eastern 
Region (Assam, Tripura, Mizoram, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh).  The 
Coffee Quality Division of the Research Department 
is involved in setting up quality standards, capacity 
building in the areas of coffee roasting and retailing 
business and certification of coffee as per National 
and International quality standards. The Promotion 
Department is involved in promotion of Indian 
Coffee in export market and also promotion of coffee 
consumption in domestic market.
(ii) Rubber Board

(ii) Rubber Board

The Rubber Board is a statutory body constituted

under Section 4 of the Rubber Act, 1947 and 
functioning under the administrative control of 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Board 
is headed by a Chairman appointed by the Central 
Government and has 28 other members such as 
Members of Parliament (two from House of People 
and one from Council of States), representatives 
of various interests of rubber industry such as 
rubber producing, processing, trading and rubber 
product manufacturing sectors, labour interest, 
representatives of Governments of principal rubber 
growing states and the Executive Director.

Executive and administrative powers of the Board 
are vested with the Executive Director. The Board’s 
headquarter is located at Kottayam in Kerala. 
Developmental and regulatory functions pertaining 
to the entire value chain of the Indian rubber industry 
are discharged by the Board by way of assisting and 
encouraging research, development, extension and 
training activities. The functions of the Board also 
include collection of statistics of rubber, promoting 
marketing of rubber and undertaking labour welfare 
activities.

Rubber Board has extension offices in all rubber 
producing states which includes two Zonal, 53 
Regional/Development and 135 Field offices. The 
Rubber Research Institute of India (RRII), established 
in 1955, is situated at Puthupally in Kottayam District, 
and has nine Regional Research Stations (RRS) located 
in various rubber growing states of the country. RRII 
conducts research activities for ensuring biological 
and technological improvement of NR in the country. 
The National Institute for Rubber Training (NIRT) 
located at Kottayam acts as the link between research 
and extension activities for technology transfer and 
has the mandate for human resource development in 
all sectors of the NR industry.

The Tea Board is a statutory body constituted under 
Section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 and functions under 
the administrative control of the Department of 
Commerce. The Tea Board comprises of Chairman, 
Deputy Chairman and 30 members appointed by 
Government of India representing different sections 
of the industry including Members of Parliament. 
The Board is headed by a non-official Chairman

(iii) Tea Board and Deputy Chairman is the executive head of the 
organization. There are two Executive Directors who 
are stationed at Zonal Offices one each at Guwahati 
in Assam (for entire North Eastern Region) and 
another at Coonoor in Tamil Nadu (for entire South 
India Region). The Head Office of the Board is 
located in Kolkata, West Bengal. The Board functions 
as an apex body concerned with overall development 
of the tea industry in India by providing necessary 
assistance for research and developmental activities 
aimed at increasing production, productivity and 
quality; facilitation of trade and promotion of exports 
so as to ensure maximum returns to the producers, 
including small growers; safeguarding the interests of 
the workers and the consumers; gathering statistical 
and other relevant data concerning the industry and 
disseminating the information to various segments 
of the industry, registering and licensing of different 
stakeholder’s. Tea Board has two Zonal offices at 
Guwahati (Assam) and Coonoor (Tamil Nadu), 15 
Regional Offices and one overseas office at Moscow 
which is being managed by Embassy officials.
(iv) Tobacco Board

(iv) Tobacco Board

Tobacco is an important commercial crop grown 
in India. In order to regulate production, promote 
overseas marketing and control recurring instances 
of imbalances in supply and demand, the Tobacco 
st
Board was established on 1 January 1976 by the 
Government of India under the Tobacco Board Act 
of 1975.

v	 Promoting tobacco grading at the level of 
growers.

The headquarters of Tobacco Board is at Guntur in 
Andhra Pradesh and is headed by a non-executive 
Chairman appointed by Central Government. 
The Tobacco Board Act, 1975 aims at planned 
development of tobacco industry in the country. The 
various activities of the Board outlined in the Act for 
the promotion of the industry are:

v	 Establishment of auction platforms for sale 
of Virginia tobacco by registered growers 
and functioning as an auctioneer at auction 
platforms.

v	 Maintenance and improvement of existing 
markets and development of new markets 
outside India.

v	 Purchasing Virginia tobacco from the growers 
when the same is considered necessary or 
expedient for protecting the interest of growers 
with the prior approval of the Government of 
India.

v	 Keeping constant watch/monitoring of the 
Virginia tobacco market, both in India and 
abroad and ensuring fair and remunerative 
price to the growers.

(v) Spices Board
Spices Board is a statutory body constituted under 
Section (3) of the Spices Board Act, 1986 and 
functioning under the administrative control of 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Board 
consists of 31 members and is led by the Chairman 
(appointed by the Central Government). The 
Secretary is the Chief Executive of the Board. Spices 
Board is responsible for the overall development 
of the cardamom industry and export promotion 
of 52 spices as scheduled under the Spices Board 
Act, 1986. The functions of the Board include 
research, development and domestic marketing of 
small and large cardamom; post-harvest quality 
improvement of spices and export promotion & 
quality management of spices exported from India. 
The Board is headquartered at Kochi, Kerala and has 
83 offices across the country, which include export 
promotion offices, development offices, Quality 
Evaluation Laboratories (QEL), Indian Cardamom 
Research Institute (ICRI) & regional research 
stations, spices parks, etc. The Board works with the 
stakeholders of the spices sector for undertaking 
programs and projects for development of small 
and large cardamom and for promotion of export of 
spices.

---

The programs implemented  by the Board include 
support for, infrastructure development; value 
addition; product development; strengthening 
quality evaluation infrastructure; establishing market 
linkage of farmers and exporters with international 
buyers; setting up  primary processing facilities in the 
major growing centres (Spices Parks); undertaking 
trade and brand promotion activities for Indian 
spices including co-participation of stakeholders 
in international fairs and exhibitions; monitoring 
quality and safety compliance of spices exported 
from India through the QEL; facilitating primary sale 
of cardamom through the auction system; providing 
research support to stakeholders on Small and Large 
cardamom; assisting growers of Small and Large 
cardamom for production development and growers 
of other spices for post-harvest management; working 
with the regulatory bodies of importing countries, 
trade support institutions, intergovernmental 
organizations etc. for export promotion of spices, etc.

The Marine Products Export Development Authority 
(MPEDA), a statutory body constituted under 
the MPEDA Act, 1972 under the Department of 
Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry has the 
mandate of developing a conducive ecosystem for 
marine products in the country and promotion of its 
export from India.

The Authority has its headquarters located in Kochi, 
Kerala and consists of 30 members including a 
Chairman (appointed by the Central Government). 
There are 18 field offices across the coastal states 
including one in NE India to assist the marine 
products exporters, processors and aqua culturists 
for ensuring timely advice to the stakeholders. 
MPEDA has three Trade Promotion Offices at New 
York (presently functioning at CGI office New 
York), Japan and New Delhi and five full -fledged 
Quality Control laboratories. MPEDA has also set 
up three registered societies viz, Rajiv Gandhi 
Center for aquaculture (RGCA) for promotion of 
diversified aquaculture to support export promotion 
by technology transfer, Network for Fish Quality 
Management and Sustainable Fishing (NETFISH) and 
National Centre for Sustainable aquaculture (NaCSA)

to enable aquaculture farmers to adopt sustainable 
farming practices in the Aquaculture.

(vii) Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Authority (APEDA)

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA) was established 
by the Government of India under the Agricultural 
and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority Act, 1985.

APEDA has marked its presence in almost all agro 
potential states of India and has been providing 
services to agri-export community through its 
Head Office at New Delhi and 16 Regional offices at 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Guwahati, 
Chennai, Kochi, Ahmedabad, Chandigarh, Jammu, 
Srinagar, Ladakh, Tripura, Varanasi, Bhopal and 
Vishakhapatnam.

APEDA is mandated with the responsibility of 
export promotion and development of the following 
scheduled products as provided in First Schedule of 
APEDA Act:

v	 Fruits, Vegetables and their Products

v	 Meat and Meat Products

v	 Confectionary, Biscuits and Bakery Products

v	 Poultry and Poultry Products

v	 Dairy Products

v	 Honey, Jaggery and Sugar Products

v	 Cocoa and its Products, Chocolates of all kinds

v	 Alcoholic and Non-alcoholic Beverages

v	 Cereals and Cereal Products

v	 Herbal and Medicinal Plants

v	 Groundnuts, Peanuts and Walnuts

v	 Green Pepper in Brine

---

In addition to this, APEDA has been entrusted with 
the responsibility of monitoring the import of sugar 
as well.

APEDA also functions as the Secretariat to the National 
Accreditation Board (NAB) for implementation 
of accreditation of the Certification Bodies under 
National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) 
for organic exports. “Organic Products” for export 
are to be certified only if Produced, Processed 
and Packed as per the standards laid down in 
the document- “National Programme for Organic 
Production (NPOP)”.

(viii) Export Inspection Council of India (EIC)

The Export Inspection Council (EIC) was established 
by the Government of India under Section 3 of the 
Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 to 
ensure sound development of export trade of India 
through Quality Control and pre shipment Inspection 
and for matters connected thereof. The EIC is an 
advisory body to the Government of India and is 
headed by the Chairman. The Executive Head of 
the EIC is Director (Inspection and Quality Control) 
who is responsible for enforcement of quality 
control and pre-shipment inspection of various 
commodities meant for export, which are notified by 
the Government under the Export (Quality Control 
and Inspection) Act, 1963. The EIC is located at New 
Delhi and exercises technical and administrative 
control over the Export Inspection Agencies (EIAs) 
established under Section 7 of the Act. The EIAs are 
headquartered at Mumbai, Kolkata, Kochi, Chennai 
and Delhi with a network of 24 sub offices backed 
by state-of-the art laboratories accredited by NABL 
as per ISO 17025, spread all over India and caters 
to the needs of the exporters on a pan India basis. 
The major role of the EIC is to ensure the Quality 
and Safety of products exported, in order to meet 
the requirements of the importing countries. This 
assurance is provided through either a consignmentwise inspection system or quality assurance/food 
safety management system-based certification. With 
more than fifty years of experience in the field of 
inspection, testing and certification of food items as 
per the importing country requirements, the EIC has

developed a global acceptance. The EIC certification 
has been recognized by India’s trading partners, like, 
European Union, United States of America, Australia, 
Japan, Custom Union, Saudi Arabia, Vietnam, China, 
South Africa, etc. The EIC has been instrumental 
in evolving the stakeholders including exporter 
fraternity to meet the changing requirements of the 
importing countries with rising prevalence of food 
safety incidents.

The EIC is actively involved in standard setting 
process at national and international levels and 
provide feedback to ensure the interest of exporters 
are well protected. The EIC has adopted Quality 
Management System and is ISO 9001:2015 certified 
to ensure realization of its objectives.

(ix) Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT)

Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) was set up 
nd
on 2 May 1963 as an autonomous Institution with a 
focus on Foreign Trade related Research and Training.

In recognition of its all-round achievements, the 
Institute was given the status of “Deemed to 
be University” in May 2022 by University Grants 
Commission (UGC) and graded as Category- I 
“Deemed to be University” in June 2018 by University 
Grants Commission (UGC).

The National Institute of Ranking Framework ranked 
th
15 in Management category in 2024.The Institute 
has achieved the AACSB business accreditation and 
st
was awarded the certificate on 21 December 2021.

The Board of Management is the principal executive 
body of the Institute. The BoM consists of 11 members 
and is headed by the Vice Chancellor of the Institute. 
The Secretary, Department of Commerce is the 
Chancellor of the Institute. The Vice Chancellor of the 
Institute is the principal executive of the Institute and 
exercises supervision and control over the affairs of 
the Institute.

---

v	 Executive Management Programmes (EMP) 
Division

v	 Management Development Programmes 
(MDP) Division

v	 International Collaboration and Capacity 
Development (ICCD) Division

v	 Economics Division

v	 Research Division

v	 Division of Alumni Affairs

v	 Journals Division

(x) Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP)

The Indian Institute of Packaging is an autonomous 
body under the aegis of Department of Commerce, 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of 
India established in 1966 under Societies Registration 
Act, 1860.

The Institute headquartered at Mumbai has its 
regional centres at Chennai (1971), Kolkata (1976), 
Delhi (1986), Hyderabad (2006), Ahmedabad (2017) 
and Lucknow (2023). A new centre of IIP has been 
constructed at Bengaluru. The Institute is engaged 
in various activities like testing and certification of 
packaging materials and packages for domestic and 
export market, including mandatory UN Certification 
of packaging for transport of hazardous/dangerous 
goods, training, education, consultancy, projects and 
research and development in the area of packaging.

(D) Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)

(i) State Trading Corporation of India Limited 
(STC)

Further, some members of the Governing Body are 
nominated by the different Ministries/Departments 
and Commodity Boards of Government of India. The 
Director is the Head and Principal Executive Officer 
of the Institute who is the overall in-charge of the 
organization.

The Apex advisory body of the Institute is the 
Governing Body which has one Chairman and two 
vice-chairmen and other members from industries 
representing various segments such as packaging 
materials, packaging machineries and user industries. 
Further, some members of the Governing Body are

th 
STC was set up on 18 May 1956  and played an 
important role in country’s economy by arranging 
imports of essential items of mass consumption 
(such as wheat, pulses, sugar, edible oils, etc.) and 
industrial raw materials into India and also contributed 
significantly in developing exports of a large number 
of items from India, from time to time.

$$
1 8 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

st
STC has a paid-up equity of Rs. 60 crore. As on 31
March 2024, the shareholding of Government of India 
in STC’s equity was 90 per cent.  Presently, STC is not 
carrying out any business activity.

(ii) MMTC Limited

MMTC Limited was incorporated in 1963 primarily 
to regulate the international trade of Minerals and 
Metals. The Company has an authorized Capital of 
Rs. 200 crore and paid-up equity capital of Rs. 150 
crore. The shareholding of GoI in MMTC is 89.93 per 
cent. The balance is held by financial institutions and 
public.

The Company was acting as a canalizing agency 
for export of iron ore, manganese ore, chrome ore/
concentrate and was a nominated agency for import 
of gold & silver and urea, besides trading in other 
commodities.   Currently,  MMTC in not undertaking 
any business activity.

MMTC-PAMP India Pvt. Limited (MPIPL) is a joint 
venture unlisted company between MMTC Limited 
and PAMP Ventures S.A (an affiliate of PAMP SA), 
Switzerland incorporated in 2008, which operates a 
Precious Metals processing facility at District Mewat, 
Haryana. Total Equity of MPIPL is Rs. 67.10 crore 
and MMTC is holding 26 per cent stake in the Joint 
Venture.

---

(iii) PEC Limited (Project & Equipment 
Corporation of India Ltd.)

PEC Limited was incorporated as a subsidiary 
company of State Trading Corporation in 1971 as 
“The Project and Equipment Corporation of India 
limited” and became an independent Company in 
1991. The name of the company was changed to PEC 
th 
Limited on 25 November 1997. The main functions 
of the PEC Limited included export of engineering 
equipment and projects, import of bullion and trading 
in industrial raw material and agro commodities. The 
Company has not undertaken any business activity 
since September 2019. The Financial Statement of 
the company is prepared on “None going Concern 
Basis”.

(iv) ECGC Ltd (Formerly Export Credit Guarantee 
Corporation of India Ltd.)

ECGC Limited, a premier Export Credit Agency (ECA) 
of the Government of India, was set up in 1957 in 
Mumbai, under the Companies Act 1956, to provide 
export credit insurance services on Short Term (ST) 
and Medium and Long Term (MLT) basis to exporters 
and banks to facilitate exports from the Country. 
ECGC covers export transactions destined to more 
than 200 countries of the world. The Company’s 
mandate is to promote exports from the country 
through export credit insurance to exporters on a 
“no-profit no-loss” basis. The exporters obtain credit 
insurance cover to protect their losses in the event 
of occurrence of political or commercial risks like 
default, insolvency and repudiation in respect of 
payment due from the overseas buyers. The banks 
obtain export credit insurance covers to protect 
against losses that may be incurred due to default 
or insolvency of the exporter borrower in respect of 
export credit (working capital loans) extended.

India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) was 
formed in the year 1976, after re-naming Trade Fair 
Authority of India (TFAI) and merging of Trade 
Development Authority of India (TDA). ITPO is a 
Schedule ‘B’ Miniratna Category-I CPSE under the 
administrative control of Department of Commerce 
with 100 per cent shareholding by the Government 
of India. Its Registered Office is at Pragati Maidan,

New Delhi. The regional Offices of ITPO are 
located in Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai ensuring 
representative participation of trade and industry 
from different regions of the country in its events in 
India and abroad.

India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) is a 
premier trade promotion agency of India providing 
a broad spectrum of services to trade industry and 
acting as a catalyst for growth of India’s trade. 
ITPO is engaged in providing services pertaining 
to promotion/facilitation of trade by organizing/
participating in trade fairs in India and abroad thereby 
increasing India’s exports.

In addition, ITPO undertakes promotion of trade in 
goods and services connected with or relating to 
fairs, exhibitions, conventions in India and abroad. 
It also explores new markets for traditional items 
of export and develop exports of new items with a 
view to maintaining, diversifying and expanding the 
export trade.

ITPO has three subsidiaries, namely, Karnataka 
Trade Promotion Organisation (KTPO), Tamil Nadu 
Trade Promotion Organisation (TNTPO) and ITPO 
Services Ltd. (ISL) with ITPO’s shareholding of 
51 per cent in TNTPO & KTPO and 100 per cent in 
ISL. ITPO also has a 50:50 Joint Venture, namely, 
National Centre for Trade Information (NCTI) along 
with the National Informatics Centre (NIC) which is 
under Liquidation. Further, Jammu & Kashmir Trade 
Promotion Organization (JKTPO) at Pampore is a 
Joint venture Company between the Government 
of Jammu and Kashmir with 51.25 per cent equity 
share, ITPO with 40 per cent equity share and the 
remaining equity owned by The Export Promotion 
Council for Handicrafts (EPCH) and The Carpet 
Export Promotion Council (CEPC).
(E) Government e Marketplace (GeM)

Government e Marketplace is an online platform 
that facilitates end-to-end procurement of goods 
and services by various Central/State Ministries, 
departments, organizations, public sector undertakings 
(PSUs) Panchayats, and Cooperatives. The Government’s 
concerted efforts to harness the power of digital 
platforms to achieve ‘Minimum Government, Maximum 
Governance’ led to the genesis of GeM in 2016. The

(E) Government e Marketplace (GeM)

---

online portal was established with a clear objective 
to eliminate age-old manual public procurement 
processes that were riddled with inefficiencies and 
Transparency related issues. GeM is a paperless, cashless 
and contactless ecosystem for Government buyers to 
directly purchase products and services from pan-India 
sellers and service providers through an online platform. 
GeM was envisioned to utilise the agility and speed that 
come along with a digital platform to reinvigorate public 
procurement systems and bring about a lasting change 
for all stakeholders. GeM covers the entire gamut of 
procurement process, right from vendor registration 
and item selection by buyers to receipt of goods and 
facilitation of timely payments.

GeM has recently launched special initiatives like ‘The 
Aabhar Collection’ to promote India’s rich cultural 
heritage and support local artisans and craftsmen. 
GeM has further reduced transaction charges to 0.30 
per cent with a cap of Rs. 3 lakh for orders above Rs. 
10 crore while exempting orders up to Rs. 10 lakh, and 
simplified the fee structure to support MSMEs and 
enhance their participation. Further, GeM is currently 
in the process of completely revamping its portal with 
the use of next gen technologies and updates. GeM’s 
continued evolution with cutting-edge technologies 
and its focus on transparency, sustainability, and 
inclusivity position it as a pivotal tool in India’s public 
procurement landscape.

(F) Export Promotion Councils (EPCs)

The Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) are 
organisations of exporters, registered as non-profit 
organizations under the Companies Act 2013/
Societies Registration Act 1860. Roles and functions 
of these Councils are guided by the Foreign Trade 
Policy, which also recognizes them as registering 
authorities for exporters. At present, there are thirteen 
Export Promotion Councils (EPCs), as mentioned 
below, under the Department of Commerce:

in Mumbai with the objective of promoting export 
of Dyes and Dye Intermediates, Basic Inorganic, 
Organic Chemicals including Agro Chemicals, 
Cosmetics, Soaps, Detergents, Toiletries & Essential 
Oils, Speciality Chemicals, Lubricants and Castor Oil. 
The Council’s head office is located in Mumbai and it 
has four Regional Offices at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, 
Kolkata and New Delhi.

(ii) Chemicals & Allied products Export Promotion 
Council (CAPEXIL)

Chemicals & Allied products Export Promotion 
Council (CAPEXIL), a premier Export Promotion 
Council, was set up in 1958 under the Companies Act, 
1956. The Council’s registered office and head office 
is located in Kolkata and it has four regional offices 
located at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and New Delhi.

The Council is entrusted with the export promotion 
activities of chemical based allied products which 
includes Bulk Minerals and Ores, Natural Stone 
Products, Processed Minerals, Paper & Paper Board 
Products, Auto Tyre and Tubes, Rubber 14 Products, 
Ceramics and Allied Products, Glass and Glassware, 
Plywood and Allied Products, Cement, Clinkers and 
Asbestos products, Graphite and explosives, Books, 
Publications & Printing products, Paints, Printing 
Ink and Allied Products, Miscellaneous Chemical 
Products, Ossein and Gelatin and Animal by-products.

(iii)  Council for Leather Exports (CLE)

CLE undertakes multifarious activities which are 
directed towards assisting its members in extending 
their global reach for increasing their exports. These 
activities include disseminating market information, 
trends and policy implications on commercial, 
technical and technological developments in the 
Indian leather industry, participating in major 
International fairs and  specialized trade shows across 
the globe, organizing buyer-seller meets in India and 
abroad, B2B meets in focus countries, organizing 
webinars on topics of interest to the industry, promoting design development through organizing 
designers fair in India, submitting proposals and 
representations to the Government on issues relating 
to Export Import Policies/Procedures, Duties, 
market development activities etc., for the overall 
development of the leather industry.  The Council also 
publishing in-house periodicals to keep the exporters 
abreast of all developments (publications include 
monthly magazine ‘Leather News India’, Exporters 
Directory and Facts and Figures of Exports of Leather 
and Leather Products), facilitating implementation 
of Indian Footwear and Leather Development 
Programme (IFLDP) and promoting, facilitating and 
attracting Joint Ventures, technical collaborations 
and strategic alliances, FDI etc.
CLE serves as a connecting bridge between Indian

CLE serves as a connecting bridge between Indian 
leather exporters and buyers all over the world. 
CLE has its registered Head Office at Chennai and 
five Regional Offices at Kanpur, Kolkata, New Delhi, 
Chennai & Mumbai and extension offices at Agra and 
Jalandhar. 
(iv) EEPC India

(iv) EEPC India

EEPC India is the Council set up under the aegis of 
Department of Commerce for promoting exports in 
the Engineering sector. It is a company set up under 
Section 25 of the Companies Act 1956 (company not 
for profit), keeping in view the special requirement of 
the Indian Engineering Sector for export promotion. 
EEPC India is the nodal agency for issue of Registrationcum-Membership Certificate for engineering exports 
throughout the country under the provisions of 
the Foreign Trade Policy. The organization has its 
headquarters at Kolkata with regional offices in 
Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Delhi and sub-regional 
offices in Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Hyderabad 
(Secunderabad) and Jalandhar for providing services 
to exporters of engineering products. With a view 
to establish closer connections with the engineering 
manufacturers &exporters and to have a better reach, 
EEPC India has also opened its chapters in 15 Tier II/
Tier III cities spread across the country.

a membership base of around 9500 out of which 
around 60 per cent are SMEs. EEPC India facilitates 
sourcing from India and boosts the MSMEs to raise 
their standard at par with the international best 
practices. It also encourages the SMEs to integrate 
their business with the global value chain. Keeping 
‘Engineering the Future’ as the motto, EEPC 
India serves as the reference point for the Indian 
engineering industry and the international business 
community in its efforts towards establishing India as 
a major engineering export hub.

(v) The Plastics Export Promotion Council

The Plastics Export Promotion Council (PLEXCONCIL) 
was established in 1955 and registered under section 
25 of Companies Act 1956, with the aim of promoting 
the exports of Plastics & Linoleum products from 
India and represents over 3,000 exporters primarily 
MSMEs who manufacture/trade in plastics products 
ranging from plastics raw materials to semi-finished 
and finished items. PLEXCONCIL maintains five offices 
across India-Mumbai (Head office) and regional 
offices at Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata and Ahmedabad.

The Council is presently entrusted with the export 
promotion activities of the product panels are 
Consumer & house ware products, Cordage, fishnets 
& monofilaments, FIBC, Woven sacks, Woven fabrics, 
Tarpaulin, Floor coverings, leather cloth & laminates, 
FRP & Composites, Human hair & related products, 
Medical items of plastics, Miscellaneous products 
and items, Packaging items - flexible, rigid, Plastic 
films and sheets, Plastic pipes & fittings, Plastic 
raw materials, Writing instruments & stationery and 
Merchant Exports.

(vi) Sports Goods Export Promotion Council 
(SGEPC)

The Sports Goods Export Promotion Council (SGEPC) 
was established in the year 1958 with an objective 
to promote the exports of Sports Goods from India. 
In the Year 2001, export promotion of Toys was also 
entrusted to the SGEPC. The SGEPC is managed by a 
Committee of Administration (COA), which consists 
of elected representatives from the Indian Sports 
Goods & Toy industry and includes Government 
representatives. The COA is headed by the Chairman.

---

The SGEPC’s range of activities includes activities 
that spur the Indian Sports Goods & Toy industry’s 
performance on the one hand and the activities 
that help to promote its presence internationally. 
The SGEPC organizes trade promotion activities like 
Indian participation in international trade fairs, visits 
of Business Delegations, promotional campaigns in 
international markets etc., along with various other 
activities to promote the exports of Toys & Sports 
goods from India.

(vii) Shellac and Forest Products Export Promotion 
Council (SHEFEXIL)

The Shellac Export Promotion Council was founded in 
June 1957, under the Companies Act, 1956, which was 
re-christened to Shellac and Forest Products Export 
th
Promotion Council (SHEFEXIL) on 8 February 2007. 
The Council’s registered office is located at Kolkata 
and has no additional branch or regional office.

SHEFEXIL is the designated nodal agency for export 
promotion of key products, like Nutraceuticals, 
Extracts/ Botanicals, Herbs, Guar Gum, Shellac & 
Lac based products. SHEFEXIL is mandated for 
export promotion of 8 unique panels which are 
Nutraceuticals, Vegetable Saps & Extracts, Plant 
and Plant Portions (Herbs), Guar Gum, Shellac & 
Lac based products, Other Vegetable materials, 
Fixed Vegetable Oils, Cakes & Others and North East 
Region.

(viii)  Pharmaceuticals Export Promotion Council of 
India (PHARMEXCIL) 
Pharmaceuticals  Export Promotion Council of India

Pharmaceuticals  Export Promotion Council of India 
was established in 2004 under the Companies Act, 
1956, keeping in mind the unique requirements of the 
Indian pharmaceutical industry for export promotion. 
The Council has its headquarters in Hyderabad, with 
regional offices at Mumbai and New Delhi, and branch 
offices in Ahmedabad and Chennai. There are 4603 
members in the Council.

Apart from acting as an interface with the 
Government, the Council also offers  professional 
advice to its members in areas such as compliance 
with regulatory  requirements, guidance on market 
and product potential for exports, technology upgradation, trade related help, etc. Pharmexcil also 
acts as a nodal agency for issue of Registration 
cum Membership certificates (RCMC), Certificate of 
Origin (CoO) Non-preferential; Certificate of Export 
Performance; Payment of Duty/GST Certificate to 
member companies for availing bank guarantee 
exemption and Advance Authorisation.  The Council 
participates in important exhibitions and fairs in 
various countries and also organizes international 
conferences and Reverse Buyer-Seller Meets (RBSM) 
in India.

(ix) Services Export Promotion Council (SEPC)

SEPC is an Export Promotion Council set up by 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government 
of India. As an Export Promotion Body, SEPC is 
dedicated to facilitating the growth of Indian service 
exports. As an advisory body, it actively contributes 
to the formulation of policies of Government of 
India and acts as an interface between the services 
industry and the Government of India.

SEPC has been instrumental in promoting Indian services exports and in projecting India’s image abroad 
as a reliable supplier of high-quality services. It organizes a large number of promotional activities both in 
India and abroad, such as Buyer-Seller Meets (BSM), 
trade fairs/exhibitions, and India pavilions / information booths in various exhibitions to demonstrate the 
capabilities of Indian services industry.

SEPC has a mandate to promote the following 
service sectors

Further, SEPC keeps abreast of the trends and 
opportunities in international markets for services 
and assists members in taking advantage of such 
opportunities in order to expand and diversify their 
exports. Members of SEPC can avail the benefits of 
various schemes of Ministry of Commerce & Industry, 
Government of India.

---

Annual Report 2024-25

v	 Advertising Services

v	 Architectural Services and related services

v	 Consultancy Services

v	 Distribution Services

v	 Educational Services

v	 Entertainment services including Audio-visual 
services

v	 Environmental Services

v	 Healthcare services

v	 Hotel and Tourism related services

v	 Legal Services

v	 Maritime Transport Services

v	 Marketing Research and Public Opinion Polling 
Services/Management Services

v	 Printing & Publishing Services

v	 Others

(x) Project Exports  Promotion Council  of 
India (PEPC)

v	 Civil Construction Projects

v	 Turnkey Projects  - including engineering, 
procurement and construction (from concept 
to commissioning) and essentially includes 
civil work/construction and all supplies specific 
to these turnkey projects

(a) Sectors of Development

v	 Project construction items (excluding Steel 
and Cement):

v	 Other Project Goods

PEPC, has been actively engaged in the 
development and promotion of project 
exports in major sectors of economic and 
industrial development such as construction 
of dams, hydroelectric & thermal power plants, 
industrial plants, utility buildings, large scale 
oil and natural gas pipelines, petrochemical 
refineries and complexes, motorways, tunnels 
and bridges, seaports and airports, large-scale 
housing projects, high-rise buildings, hotels & 
tourist resorts etc.

The major markets for the Indian process and 
construction engineering contractors and 
consultants have been:

(b) Markets

v	 Asia

v	 Middle East

v	 Africa

v	 North America

(xi) Export Promotion Council for EOUs and SEZ 
Units (EPCES)

Export Promotion Council for EOUs & SEZs (EPCES) 
was set up in January 2003 to service the export 
promotional needs of EOUs & SEZs in the country. 
Over the years, EPCES has made an endeavor 
to facilitate consultations between different 
stakeholders including industry, policy makers, bank, 
financial institutions and multilateral agencies to 
facilitate greater competitiveness in the Indian EOUs 
& SEZ sector.

EPCES has also been recognized by the Director 
General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry, Government of India vide th
DGFT Public Notice No. 59/2002-7 dated 15 January 
2003 and is registered under Societies Registration 
Act XXI of 1860.

$$
1 5 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

The objectives of EPCES includes promoting exports 
from India and to earn more foreign exchange for 
the country, facilitating  interaction between the 
EOUs/SEZs community and Government both at 
the Central and State level, providing benefits of 
Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme rendered 
by the Central Government to Indian Exporters for 
assisting their export market development efforts 
and collaborating with other export promotion 
councils/export promotion organizations in India and 
similar bodies in foreign countries as well as with 
international organizations working in the field.

(xii) Oilseeds & Produce Export Promotion Council 
(IOPEPC)

studies to facilitate access and resolve trade barriers 
with Government support. Through buyer-seller 
meets and participation in international trade shows, 
the Council actively promotes trade while maintaining 
comprehensive data and statistics for the Oilseed 
sector. Additionally, it assesses Government policies 
to provide strategic insights to its members and 
shares vital market intelligence through research 
reports and crop surveys.

Driven by a commitment to foster self-reliance 
in Oilseed and Oil production, IOPEPC works to 
reduce dependency on imports by promoting 
excellence in quality and processing. To achieve 
this mission, IOPEPC has formalized Memorandums 
of Understanding (MoUs) with leading agricultural 
institutions such as the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research - Indian Institute of Oilseeds Research 
in Hyderabad, the International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), and 
the Directorate of Groundnut Research in Junagadh. 
These partnerships enhance innovation, research, 
and best practices in the Oilseed sector.
The Council undertakes numerous initiatives to

Through these ongoing efforts, IOPEPC strengthens 
India’s Oilseed value chain, fosters collaboration 
across sectors, and promotes a sustainable ecosystem 
for the growth and prosperity of the industry.

(xiii) Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council 
(GJEPC)

The Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council 
(GJEPC) is an EPC established in 1966 by the 
Government of India to promote the country’s Gem 
and Jewellery industry. It is headquartered in Mumbai 
and has around 10,000 members. GJEPC organizes 
Reverse Buyer Seller Meets (RBSMs) and participates 
in international events/exhibitions to showcase 
industry innovations and export promotion. It is 
also running training institutes like Indian Institute 
of Gems and Jewellery (IIGJ) at locations like Delhi, 
Mumbai and Jaipur etc.

Board of Trade (BOT)

The Council for Trade Development and Promotion 
(CTDP), a platform for regular discussions between 
the Central Government and State Governments/
Union Territories on international trade, was merged 
with the Board of Trade (BoT) in July 2019. This merger 
aimed to streamline the consultation process. The 
Board of Trade now serves as the primary advisory 
body for discussions and consultations with trade 
and industry. Currently, the Board of Trade consists of 
29 non-official members, 25 ex-officio members, and 
39 official members, including the Director General 
of Foreign Trade as Member Secretary, the Minister 
of State for Commerce & Industry, the Ministers in 
Charge of Trade and Commerce in States and UTs 
as Members, and the Hon’ble Commerce & Industry 
Minister as Chairperson.

---

The Board of Trade (BoT) serves as an advisory body 
to the Government, offering recommendations on 
policy measures related to the Foreign Trade Policy. 
This aims to enhance India’s trade performance. 
The BoT provides a forum for State Governments 
and union territories to express their regional 
perspectives on trade policy. Additionally, it functions 
as a platform for the Government of India to inform 
State Governments and union territories about global 
developments impacting India’s trade. The BoT plays 
a crucial role in facilitating discussions on traderelated matters with industry bodies, associations, 
Export Promotion Councils, and State and Union 
Territory Governments.

th
The last Board of Trade meeting was held on 13
September 2024 in Mumbai. The meeting was 
attended by various dignitaries, including ministers, 
secretaries, and representatives from the Government, 
State Governments, financial institutions, and 
the Board of Trade. The Hon’ble CIM opened the 
meeting, emphasizing the Government’s mission 
to achieve US$ 2 trillion in exports by 2030 and 
the robust growth in the service sector. Several key 
events took place during the meeting like Launch of 
Jan Sunwai portal, Launch of ECGC’s revamped ERP 
Portal SMILE followed by presentation by DGFT and 
various states. Various stakeholders, including state 
representatives, EPCs, and industry associations, 
raised concerns and suggestions related to trade 
barriers, quality standards, export promotion, and 
infrastructure challenges. Representatives from 
different states shared their respective export 
initiatives, challenges, and expressed their support to 
the Central Government initiatives in promoting the 
external trade.

(i) Federation of Indian Export Organizations 
(FIEO)

FIEO is registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 with its Headquarters in Delhi, Regional 
Offices in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata, and 
Chapters in Jaipur, Kanpur, Ludhiana, Ahmedabad, 
Indore, Hyderabad, Kochi, Bengaluru, Coimbatore, 
Vijayawada, Bhubaneswar, Ranchi and Guwahati.

FIEO provides the crucial interface between 
International Trading community of India with the 
Central and State Governments, Financial Institutions, 
Ports, Railways, Surface Transport and all engaged 
in Export Trade Facilitation.  FIEO serves directly or 
indirectly the interests of over 200,000 exporters 
from every Industry and Services sector in the 
country.

(H) Other Organizations

(a) Major Activities and Achievements

v	 During the fiscal year 2024-25 (till 
November 2024), FIEO orchestrated a 
total of 515 strategically located export 
promotion programs across India as 
well as abroad, devising strategy and 
streamlining the process for exporters 
to seamlessly market their products.

v	 FIEO actively addresses exporters’ concerns by liaising with relevant authorities to facilitate prompt resolution.

v	 The FIEO website, accessible at www.
fieo.org, provides up-to-date trade 
policies, publications, global business 
prospects, and links to international 
trade promotion organizations.

v	 Members have the option to upload 
product photographs, company logos, 
and detailed company profiles on the 
FIEO website, enhancing their visibility.

v	 FIEO arranges interactive sessions 
with policy makers, ensuring that 
critical trade matters are brought to 
the Government’s attention for swift 
resolution.

---

v	 Throughout the year, FIEO organized 
interactive video conferences with 
Indian Ambassadors in various 
countries, fostering discussions on 
business promotion, challenges, and 
opportunities for Indian exporters.

v	 During the year 2024-25 (upto 
November 2024), FIEO has pursued 
important issues with the Government 
regularly which finally got resolved viz:

Ø	 Extension of Interest Equalisation 
Scheme (IES) for Pre and Post 
shipment Rupee Export Credit

Ø	 Addition of different Departments 
and Ministries for exemption under 
mandatory Quality Control Orders 
(QCOs) by Advance Authorisation 
holders, EOU and SEZ for goods 
to be utilised/consumed in 
manufacture of the goods export 
products

Ø	 Exemption of compensation cess 
against imports into units of SEZ/
SEZ developer for authorised 
operations
Ø	 Streamlining of physical

v	 In the current fiscal year, FIEO has 
undertaken the following key research 
projects in association with respective 
State Governments:

Ø	 Formulation of export policy, 
supplemented by an export 
strategy, for the State of Rajasthan

Ø	 Preparation of export strategy for 
the State of Arunachal Pradesh

In addition to the above, FIEO publishes many 
monthly and weekly bulletins, reports, articles etc. on 
various topics with the objective to keep the trade 
and industry updated on the latest happenings in the 
international trade sector. FIEO recognizes exporters 
and export facilitators and confers “Niryat Shree” and 
“Niryat Bandhu” Awards respectively to encourage the 
exporters to perform better in year to year. Furthermore, 
to encourage & motivate the members, FIEO organizes 
Export Excellence Awards on Regional basis.

(ii) Indian Diamond Institute (IDI)

Established in 1978 under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860, and the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950, the 
Indian Diamond Institute (IDI) is a leading vocational 
education institution focused on Diamond, Gems and 
Jewellery. Sponsored by the Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry, Government of India, and supported by 
the Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council, IDI 
offers comprehensive training programs covering 
various aspects of the industry, including Diamond 
Manufacturing, Grading, Jewellery Designing, 
Manufacturing and Gemology IDI plays a pivotal role 
in skill enhancement, training customs officials in 
Gold Appraising, Rough Diamond Sorting, Diamond 
Grading, and upgrading the skills of employees in 
MSME G&J units through the Centre for Entrepreneur 
Development (CED), Government of Gujarat. The 
institute’s Gemological Laboratory conducts testing 
and identification of Diamonds, Gem Stones, and 
Jewellery, issuing quality reports. Its Diamond 
Grading Laboratory is authorized by the DGFT, 
Streamlining of physical 
MoC&I, for certification and grading of Diamonds.
(iii) National Centre for Trade Information (NCTI)

(iii) National Centre for Trade Information (NCTI)

The Union Cabinet in its meeting dated 30.06.2021 
approved the winding up/voluntary liquidation of 
NCTI. Currently, NCTI is under liquidation process.

---

(iv) Price Stabilization Fund Trust (PSFT)

The Price Stabilisation Fund Trust was registered 
th 
on 11 September 2003 as a Public Trust under 
the Indian Trust Act, 1882 jointly by NABARD and 
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry initially for a period of 10 years to implement 
the Price Stabilization Fund scheme launched 
by the Department of Commerce to alleviate the 
hardship faced by the growers of coffee, tea, rubber 
and tobacco due to continued low prices of these 
commodities. The Trust was re-registered for a 
th
further period of ten years beyond 11 September

$$
1 1 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
\&
$$

$$
1 1 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

th
2013 i.e. upto 11 September 2023. The activities of 
st
PSFT were closed on 31 March 2015.

$$
1 1 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

(v) India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF)

The India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF) is a 
Trust established by the Department of Commerce, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of 
India. IBEF’s primary objective is to promote and 
create international awareness of Brand India in 
overseas markets and to facilitate the dissemination 
of knowledge about Indian products and services. 
Towards this objective, IBEF works closely with 
stakeholders across government and industry.

---

2
Chapter

GLOBAL ECONOMIC AND 
TRADE SITUATION

---

1. GLOBAL ECONOMY

v	 As per International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
1
2024, global growth is estimated at 3.3 per 
cent in 2023 and is projected to slow at the rate 
of 3.2 per cent during 2024 and 2025. However, 
the recent prediction for global growth in five 
years, at 3.1 per cent, is still below normal 
when compared to the pre-pandemic average. 
Ageing populations and low productivity are 
two examples of persistent structural barriers 
that are preventing many economies from 
reaching their full potential. Price pressures 
still exist in some nations, but overall, the fight 
against inflation has been won.    
v	 The aggregate output of the Advanced

the aggregate output of Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies (EMDEs) is expected to 
grow by 4.2 per cent both in 2024 and 2025, 
as compared to 4.4 per cent in 2023. The 
growth projections as per the World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) of IMF are as follows:

Global Growth Projections (%)

|  |  | Projections |  | Difference from July 2024 WEO Update |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 2023 | 2024 | 2025 | 2024 | 2025 |  |
| World Output | 3.3 | 3.2 | 3.2 | 0.0 | (-)0.1 |
| Advanced Economies | 1.7 | 1.8 | 1.8 | 0.1 | 0.0 |
| United States | 2.9 | 2.8 | 2.2 | 0.2 | 0.3 |
| Euro Area | 0.4 | 0.8 | 1.2 | (-)0.1 | (-)0.3 |
| Emerging Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs) | 4.4 | 4.2 | 4.2 | 0.0 | (-)0.1 |
| Emerging and Developing Asia | 5.7 | 5.3 | 5.0 | (-)0.1 | (-)0.1 |
| China | 5.2 | 4.8 | 4.5 | (-)0.2 | 0.0 |
| India | 8.2 | 7.0 | 6.5 | 0.0 | 0.0 |

Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Database, October 2024
Note: *Projections

Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2024

Trend in Global Growth

1International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Economic Outlook (WEO), October 2024, “Policy Pivot, Rising Threats”,

---

2. GLOBAL TRADE

v	 Global merchandise trade turned upwards in 
the first half of 2024 with a 2.3 per cent yearon-year increase, which should be followed by 
further moderate expansion in the rest of the 
year and in 2025. The rebound comes on the 
heels of a slump in 2023 driven by high inflation 
and rising interest rates. As per World Trade 
2
Organization (WTO) 2024, world merchandise 
trade volume is expected to grow 2.7 per cent 
in 2024 and 3.0 per cent in 2025, as compared 
to (-)1.1 per cent in 2023. The 2.7 per cent grow 
in merchandise trade in 2024 is a significant 
upgrade as compared to the WTO’s forecast 
of April 2024, which projected a growth 
of 2.6 per cent. Global trade has displayed 
remarkable resilience over the past few years 
despite continuous shocks including COVID-19 
pandemic, supply chain disruptions and the 
geo-political uncertainties. The demand for 
trade-intensive manufactured goods was 
particularly affected by the lingering effects 
of high energy prices and inflation, but over 
the next two years, this is expected to improve 
gradually as inflationary pressures ease. There 
are downside risks to the forecasts on account 
of the geo-political tensions and policy 
uncertainty.       
Merchandise Trade Volume Growth

v	 Trade growth has shown a varied pattern 
across regions/countries. On the export side, 
Africa registered the strongest growth of 4.3 
per cent in 2023, followed by North America at 
3.7 per cent and South America at 2.3 per cent. 
Other regions registered modest and negative 
export growth, as per WTO data. In 2024, Asia 
is expected to register the strongest growth 
of 7.4 per cent followed by Middle East at 4.7 
per cent and South America at 4.6 per cent. 
All other regions are expected to see positive 
export growth except Europe where exports 
are expected to contract by 1.4 per cent.

v	 On the import side, the Commonwealth 
of Independent States (CIS) recorded the 
strongest import growth of 17.9 per cent, 
followed by the Middle East at 8.5 per cent. 
All other regions registered negative growth 
in 2023. In 2024, Middle East is expected to 
record the strongest import growth of 9.0 per 
cent, followed by South America at 5.6 per 
cent and Asia at 4.3 per cent. Other regions are 
expected to see modest growth except Europe 
where imports are expected to contract by 2.3 
per cent.

Merchandise Trade Volume Growth

|  | 2020 | 2021 | 2022 | 2023 | 2024* | 2025* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| World Merchandise Trade Volume | (-)5.3 | 9.0 | 2.2 | (-)1.1 | 2.7 | 3.0 |
| Exports |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| North America | (-)9.2 | 6.4 | 3.9 | 3.7 | 2.1 | 2.9 |
| South America | (-)5.0 | 6.7 | 3.0 | 2.3 | 4.6 | (-)0.1 |
| Europe | (-)8.5 | 6.9 | 1.8 | (-)2.6 | (-)1.4 | 1.8 |
| CIS(Commonwealth of Independent States) | (-)1.1 | (-)0.8 | (-)1.9 | (-)4.5 | 4.5 | 1.7 |
| Africa | (-)7.2 | 3.8 | (-)2.5 | 4.3 | 2.5 | 2.2 |
| Middle East | (-)6.4 | (-)1.6 | 3.8 | 1.1 | 4.7 | 1.0 |
| Asia | 0.6 | 13.1 | 0.2 | 0.3 | 7.4 | 4.7 |
| Imports |  |  |  |  |  |  |

2World Trade Organization (WTO) 2024, “Global Trade Outlook and Statistics”, Update: October 2024.

---

Annual Report 2024-25

|  | 2020 | 2021 | 2022 | 2023 | 2024* | 2025* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| North America | (-)5.2 | 11.9 | 5.7 | (-)2.0 | 3.3 | 2.0 |
| South America | (-)9.9 | 24.9 | 4.1 | (-)4.5 | 5.6 | 1.7 |
| Europe | (-)8.2 | 7.5 | 4.4 | (-)5.0 | (-)2.3 | 2.2 |
| CIS(Commonwealth of Independent States) | (-)5.2 | 9.4 | (-)5.7 | 17.9 | 1.1 | 1.7 |
| Africa | (-)13.9 | 5.8 | 6.5 | 0.1 | 1.0 | 1.1 |
| Middle East | (-)8.7 | 12.9 | 10.5 | 8.5 | 9.0 | (-)1.1 |
| Asia | (-)1.0 | 10.3 | (-)1.0 | (-)0.7 | 4.3 | 5.1 |

Source: WTO press release dated October 2024 
Note: *Projections

Note: *Projections

v	 As per the IMF, the growth in world trade volume (Goods & Services) was 0.8 per cent in 2023 and is 
expected to increase significantly to 3.1 per cent in 2024 and 3.4 per cent in 2025.

Growth in World Trade Volume (Goods & Services)

Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2024
Note: *Projections, AEs- Advanced Economies, EMDEs- Emerging Market and Developing Economies.

Note: *Projections, AEs- Advanced Economies, EMDEs- Emerging Market and Developing Economies.

3. INDIA’S TRADE VIS-À-VIS OTHER 
ECONOMIES

Total Exports: Month-wise year-on-year growth (%)

The table below compares exports (merchandise 
+ services) growth of selected economies, namely

| Period | Brazil | Canada | China | Germany | India | Japan | Korea, Republic of | UK | USA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Jan-24 | 16.79 | -4.32 | 8.90 | 2.57 | 7.02 | 1.09 | 18.26 | 11.06 | 0.82 |
| Feb-24 | 13.95 | 5.76 | 5.38 | 0.82 | 8.30 | -0.53 | 5.51 | 4.24 | 6.37 |
| Mar-24 | -13.51 | -1.32 | -7.78 | -5.07 | -0.97 | -2.46 | 3.29 | -0.29 | 0.82 |
| Apr-24 | 13.22 | 2.49 | 2.25 | 9.98 | 8.52 | -3.12 | 13.80 | 2.36 | 5.64 |
| May-24 | -6.40 | -1.01 | 7.65 | -1.68 | 11.82 | 4.45 | 10.22 | -4.27 | 4.73 |

Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, India, Japan, Korea, 
UK and USA since January 2024. Export growth 
exhibited mixed trend in all these economies except 
Korea and USA it shows positive growth as per WTO 
data.

---

| Period | Brazil | Canada | China | Germany | India | Japan | Korea, Republic of | UK | USA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Jun-24 | -2.01 | 2.76 | 8.58 | -6.34 | 2.89 | -2.52 | 6.00 | -1.89 | 4.96 |
| Jul-24 | 9.30 | 2.44 | 8.64 | 4.89 | 6.05 | 1.36 | 14.01 | -5.67 | 5.96 |
| Aug-24 | -7.04 | -4.18 | 9.90 | 0.56 | -3.09 | 6.52 | 11.81 | -1.56 | 5.38 |
| Sep-24 | -1.17 | -1.24 | 5.23 | 3.96 | 6.88 | 4.33 | 8.88 | 3.18 | 2.22 |

Source: WTO Database
Note: Growth rate of a particular month is calculated vis-à-vis same month of the previous year.

Note: Growth rate of a particular month is calculated vis-à-vis same month of the previous year.

Table below compares imports (merchandise + 
services) growth of selected economies, namely, 
Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, India, Japan, Korea 
and UK and USA. Imports growth exhibited mixed

trend in all these economies since January 2024 
except USA. For India, import growth has been 
positive for most of the months in 2024 except March 
as per WTO data.

Total Imports: Month-wise year-on-year growth (%)

| Period | Brazil | Canada | China | Germany | India | Japan | Korea, Republic of | UK | USA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Jan-24 | 3.13 | -1.07 | 18.47 | -3.19 | 1.44 | -15.49 | -4.98 | 1.58 | 0.07 |
| Feb-24 | 7.16 | 6.45 | -4.84 | -3.41 | 11.10 | -7.50 | -9.61 | 1.03 | 5.67 |
| Mar-24 | -3.78 | 0.93 | -1.01 | -5.43 | -5.49 | -12.08 | -8.85 | -1.41 | 0.40 |
| Apr-24 | 15.48 | 6.47 | 11.17 | 5.47 | 13.71 | -2.43 | 7.58 | 7.43 | 7.82 |
| May-24 | 4.15 | -1.57 | 3.62 | -6.05 | 8.02 | -0.21 | -0.28 | -2.94 | 4.79 |
| Jun-24 | 12.43 | -4.18 | -1.58 | -6.64 | 4.30 | -4.44 | -6.36 | 7.69 | 3.83 |
| Jul-24 | 19.10 | 3.25 | 8.83 | 5.44 | 9.13 | 5.13 | 10.76 | 3.80 | 12.00 |
| Aug-24 | 16.46 | -0.56 | 1.79 | -1.12 | 4.38 | 2.12 | 7.13 | 7.77 | 5.58 |
| Sep-24 | 21.47 | 0.25 | 1.60 | 5.80 | 4.02 | 7.34 | 3.00 | 12.80 | 9.17 |

Source: WTO Database
Note: Growth rate of a particular month is calculated vis-à-vis same month of the previous year.

Note: Growth rate of a particular month is calculated vis-à-vis same month of the previous year.

---

3
Chapter

TRENDS IN INDIA’S 
FOREIGN TRADE

---

1.       OVERVIEW

v	 Despite persistent global challenges, total 
exports (merchandise + services) surpassed 
the highest record of 2022-23. India’s total 
exports reached US$ 778.13 billion in 2023-
24 as against US$ 776.40 billion in 2022-23, 
registering a positive growth of 0.22 per cent. 
Total exports during April-December 2024 
estimated at US$ 602.64 billion as compared 
to US$ 568.36 billion in April-December 2023, 
registering a positive growth of 6.03 per cent.
Overall Trade

v	 Total imports (Merchandise & Services) were 
US$ 856.52 billion in 2023-24 as compared 
to US$ 898.01 billion in 2022-23, exhibiting 
a negative growth of (-)4.62 per cent. 
Total imports during April-December 2024 
estimated at US$ 682.15 billion as compared 
to US$ 638.03 billion in April-December 2023, 
registering a growth of 6.91 per cent.

v	 Trends in overall trade in the last ten years are 
given below:

| S. No. | Year | Exports | Growth% | Imports | Growth% |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 2014-15 | 468.45 | 0.48 | 529.61 | 0.13 |
| 2 | 2015-16 | 416.60 | (-)11.07 | 465.64 | (-)12.08 |
| 3 | 2016-17 | 440.05 | 5.63 | 480.21 | 3.13 |
| 4 | 2017-18 | 498.62 | 13.31 | 583.11 | 21.43 |
| 5 | 2018-19 | 538.08 | 7.91 | 640.14 | 9.78 |
| 6 | 2019-20 | 526.55 | (-)2.14 | 602.98 | (-)5.80 |
| 7 | 2020-21 | 497.90 | (-)5.44 | 511.96 | (-)15.09 |
| 8 | 2021-22 | 676.53 | 35.88 | 760.06 | 48.46 |
| 9 | 2022-23 | 776.40 | 14.76 | 898.01 | 18.15 |
| 10 | 2023-24 | 778.13 | 0.22 | 856.52 | (-)4.62 |
|  | Apr-Dec 2023 | 568.36 |  | 638.03 |  |
|  | Apr-Dec 2024* | 602.64 | 6.03 | 682.15 | 6.91 |

Overall Trade

* The latest data for services sector released by RBI is for November 2024. The data for December 2024 is an estimation.

Department of Commerce

---

2. INDIA’S MERCHANDISE TRADE

316.65 billion during April-December 2023, 
registering a positive growth of 1.60 per cent.

v	 Merchandise imports also declined from US$ 
715.97 billion in 2022-23 to US$ 678.21 billion 
in 2023-24, registering a negative growth of 
(-)5.27 per cent. Merchandise imports for the 
period April-December 2024 were US$ 532.48 
billion as compared to US$ 506.39 billion 
during April-December 2023, registering a 
growth of 5.15 per cent.

v	 Trends in merchandise trade in the last ten 
years are given in the table below.

Merchandise Trade

| S. No. | Year | Exports | Growth% | Imports | Growth% |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 2014-15 | 310.34 | (-)1.29 | 448.03 | (-)0.48 |
| 2 | 2015-16 | 262.29 | (-)15.48 | 381.01 | (-)14.96 |
| 3 | 2016-17 | 275.85 | 5.17 | 384.36 | 0.88 |
| 4 | 2017-18 | 303.53 | 10.03 | 465.58 | 21.13 |
| 5 | 2018-19 | 330.08 | 8.75 | 514.08 | 10.42 |
| 6 | 2019-20 | 313.36 | (-)5.06 | 474.71 | (-)7.66 |
| 7 | 2020-21 | 291.81 | (-)6.88 | 394.44 | (-)16.91 |
| 8 | 2021-22 | 422.00 | 44.62 | 613.05 | 55.43 |
| 9 | 2022-23 | 451.07 | 6.89 | 715.97 | 16.79 |
| 10 | 2023-24 | 437.07 | (-)3.10 | 678.21 | (-)5.27 |
|  | Apr-Dec 2023 | 316.65 |  | 506.39 |  |
|  | Apr-Dec 2024(P) | 321.71 | 1.60 | 532.48 | 5.15 |

Source: DGCI&S, P stands for Provisional

India’s Merchandise Trade in last 10 years v	 The share of India in global merchandise exports increased from 1.70 per cent in 2014 to 1.82 per cent in 
th 
2023. During the same time period, India’s ranking among global merchandise exporters climbed from 19
th 
to 17 place.

India’s Rank and Share in World Merchandise Exports

Source: WTO database

3. INDIA’S SERVICES TRADE

v	 Services imports were recorded at US$ 178.31 
billion in 2023-24 as compared to US $ 182.05 
billion in 2022-23, a decline of (-)2.05 per cent. 
Service imports during April-December 2024 
estimated at US$ 149.67 billion, registering 
a growth of 13.69 per cent vis-à-vis April-
December 2023 (US$ 131.64 billion).

Services imports were recorded at US$ 178.31 
billion in 2023-24 as compared to US $ 182.05 
billion in 2022-23, a decline of (-)2.05 per cent. 
Service imports during April-December 2024 
estimated at US$ 149.67 billion, registering 
a growth of 13.69 per cent vis-à-vis April-
December 2023 (US$ 131.64 billion).

Source: RBI, 
* The latest data for services sector released by RBI is for November 2024. The data for December 2024 is an estimation.

v	 Trends in services trade in the last ten years are 
given in the table below:

| S. No | Year | Exports | Growth% | Imports | Growth% |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 2014-15 | 158.11 | 4.15 | 81.58 | 3.60 |
| 2 | 2015-16 | 154.31 | (-)2.40 | 84.63 | 3.75 |
| 3 | 2016-17 | 164.20 | 6.41 | 95.85 | 13.25 |
| 4 | 2017-18 | 195.09 | 18.81 | 117.53 | 22.61 |
| 5 | 2018-19 | 208.00 | 6.62 | 126.06 | 7.26 |
| 6 | 2019-20 | 213.19 | 2.50 | 128.27 | 1.75 |
| 7 | 2020-21 | 206.09 | (-)3.33 | 117.52 | (-)8.38 |
| 8 | 2021-22 | 254.53 | 23.50 | 147.01 | 25.09 |
| 9 | 2022-23 | 325.33 | 27.82 | 182.05 | 23.83 |
| 10 | 2023-24 | 341.06 | 4.84 | 178.31 | (-)2.05 |
|  | Apr-Dec 2023 | 251.71 |  | 131.64 |  |
|  | Apr-Dec 2024* | 280.94 | 11.61 | 149.67 | 13.69 |

---

India's Services Trade in last 10 years

Source: RBI

India's services exports have experienced a phenomenal trajectory in commercial exports over the years in the global market. From 2014 to 2023, India's services exports surged from US$156.61 billion in 2014 to US$336.92 billion

in 2023, showcasing an impressive Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 8.88 per cent. During the same period, India's rank has improved from $ 8^{th} $ to $ 7^{th} $ , maintaining its position as a key player among global competitors.

Merchandise trade deficit narrowed down from US$ 264.90 billion in 2022-23 to US$

Total trade deficit decreased from US$121.62 billion in 2022-23 to US$78.39 billion in FY 2023-24 registering an improvement of 35.54 per cent. Total trade deficit estimated at US$ 79.50 billion during April-December 2024 as compared to US$ 69.67 billion during April December 2023.

Source: WTO database

4. TRADE BALANCE

A surplus of US$162.75 billion was recorded in services trade for 2023-24, which is higher than the trade surplus of US$143.28 billion in 2022-23. Services trade surplus estimated at US$131.27 billion during April-December 2024 as compared to US$120.07 billion during April- December 2023.

---

Trade Balance

(Values in US$ billion)

| S. No | Year | Overall Trade Balance | Merchandise Trade Balance | Services Trade Balance |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 2014-15 | (-)61.17 | (-)137.69 | 76.53 |
| 2 | 2015-16 | (-)49.04 | (-)118.72 | 69.68 |
| 3 | 2016-17 | (-)40.16 | (-)108.50 | 68.34 |
| 4 | 2017-18 | (-)84.49 | (-)162.05 | 77.56 |
| 5 | 2018-19 | (-)102.06 | (-)184.00 | 81.94 |
| 6 | 2019-20 | (-)76.43 | (-)161.35 | 84.92 |
| 7 | 2020-21 | (-)14.06 | (-)102.63 | 88.57 |
| 8 | 2021-22 | (-)83.53 | (-)191.05 | 107.52 |
| 9 | 2022-23 | (-)121.62 | (-)264.90 | 143.28 |
| 10 | 2023-24 | (-)78.39 | (-)241.14 | 162.75 |
|  | Apr-Dec 2023 | (-)69.67 | (-)189.74 | 120.07 |
|  | Apr-Dec 2024(P) | (-)79.50 | (-)210.77 | 131.27 |

Source: DGCI&S and RBI, P stands for Provisional

5. MAJOR COMMODITIES OF EXPORT AND IMPORT

Exports of Top 10 Principal Commodities in 2023-24

(Values in US$ billion)

Source: DGCI&S

Exports of Top 10 Principal Commodities in April-November 2024(P)

| S. No | Principal Commodity | Apr-Nov 2023 | Apr-Nov 2024(P) | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Petroleum products | 55.02 | 44.09 | (-)19.86 | 15.54 |
| 2 | Drug formulations, biologicals | 14.01 | 15.18 | 8.31 | 5.35 |
| 3 | Telecom instruments | 10.14 | 14.32 | 41.25 | 5.05 |
| 4 | Pearl, precious, semi-precious stones | 12.98 | 10.47 | (-)19.29 | 3.69 |
| 5 | Electric machinery and equipment | 8.09 | 9.35 | 15.54 | 3.30 |
| 6 | Gold and other precious metal jewellery | 8.29 | 8.12 | (-)2.04 | 2.86 |
| 7 | Products of iron and steel | 6.39 | 6.47 | 1.33 | 2.28 |
| 8 | Iron and steel | 7.53 | 6.20 | (-)17.66 | 2.18 |
| 9 | Motor vehicle/cars | 5.60 | 5.90 | 5.40 | 2.08 |
| 10 | Rmg cotton incl accessories | 5.00 | 5.71 | 14.27 | 2.01 |
|  | Total Exports | 278.26 | 283.70 | 1.95 | 100.00 |

(Values in US$ billion)

---

Imports of Top 10 Principal Commodities in 2023-24

| S. No | Principal Commodity | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Petroleum: crude | 162.21 | 139.29 | (-)14.13 | 20.54 |
| 2 | Gold | 35.02 | 45.54 | 30.06 | 6.72 |
| 3 | Petroleum products | 47.21 | 39.44 | (-)16.45 | 5.82 |
| 4 | Coal, Coke and Briquettes etc. | 49.74 | 38.88 | (-)21.82 | 5.73 |
| 5 | Electronics components | 25.13 | 34.36 | 36.76 | 5.07 |
| 6 | Pearl, precious, semi-precious stones | 30.70 | 23.83 | (-)22.37 | 3.51 |
| 7 | Iron and steel | 17.72 | 18.65 | 5.23 | 2.75 |
| 8 | Telecom instruments | 16.38 | 18.46 | 12.69 | 2.72 |
| 9 | Indl. Machinery for dairy etc. | 15.08 | 16.49 | 9.39 | 2.43 |
| 10 | Plastic raw materials | 17.88 | 16.47 | (-)7.90 | 2.43 |
|  | Total Imports | 715.97 | 678.21 | (-)5.27 | 100.00 |

Source: DGCI&S

Imports of Top 10 Principal Commodities in April-November 2024 (P)
(Values in US$ billion)

(Values in US$ billion)

| S. No | Principal Commodity | Apr-Nov 2023 | Apr-Nov 2024(P) | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Petroleum: crude | 89.81 | 95.06 | 5.84 | 20.12 |
| 2 | Gold | 32.93 | 37.39 | 13.55 | 7.91 |
| 3 | Petroleum products | 25.22 | 27.98 | 10.96 | 5.92 |
| 4 | Electronics components | 21.42 | 23.73 | 10.78 | 5.02 |
| 5 | Coal, Coke and Briquittes etc. | 25.84 | 22.14 | (-)14.30 | 4.69 |
| 6 | Telecom instruments | 12.33 | 13.44 | 9.02 | 2.84 |
| 7 | Computer hardware, peripherals | 10.66 | 12.61 | 18.32 | 2.67 |
| 8 | Vegetable oils | 10.53 | 12.20 | 15.91 | 2.58 |
| 9 | Indl. machinery for dairy etc. | 10.78 | 12.11 | 12.29 | 2.56 |
| 10 | Pearl, precious, semi-precious stones | 15.23 | 11.97 | (-)21.40 | 2.53 |
|  | Total imports | 440.24 | 472.57 | 5.10 | 100.00 |

Source: DGCI&S, P stands for provisional

6. MAJOR EXPORT DESTINATIONS AND IMPORT SOURCES

Top 10 Export Destinations of India in 2023-24

| S. No | Country | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | U S A | 78.55 | 77.52 | (-)1.31 | 17.74 |
| 2 | U A E | 31.61 | 35.63 | 12.71 | 8.15 |
| 3 | Netherlands | 21.62 | 22.37 | 3.46 | 5.12 |
| 4 | China | 15.33 | 16.67 | 8.70 | 3.81 |
| 5 | Singapore | 11.99 | 14.41 | 20.19 | 3.30 |
| 6 | U K | 11.46 | 12.98 | 13.30 | 2.97 |
| 7 | Saudi Arab | 10.73 | 11.56 | 7.75 | 2.64 |
| 8 | Bangladesh | 12.22 | 11.07 | (-)9.41 | 2.53 |
| 9 | Germany | 10.14 | 9.84 | (-)2.91 | 2.25 |
| 10 | Italy | 8.69 | 8.77 | 0.86 | 2.01 |
|  | Total Exports | 451.07 | 437.07 | (-)3.10 | 100.00 |

(Values in US$ billion)

---

Top 10 Export Destinations of India in April-November 2024 (P)

(Values in US$ billion)

| S. No | Country | Apr-Nov 2023 | Apr-Nov 2024(P) | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | U S A | 50.29 | 52.91 | 5.19 | 18.65 |
| 2 | U A E | 20.77 | 23.88 | 14.95 | 8.42 |
| 3 | Netherland | 13.46 | 16.31 | 21.15 | 5.75 |
| 4 | U K | 8.34 | 9.60 | 15.18 | 3.38 |
| 5 | Singapore | 7.81 | 9.40 | 20.37 | 3.31 |
| 6 | China | 10.28 | 9.21 | (-)10.40 | 3.25 |
| 7 | Saudi Arab | 7.07 | 7.31 | 3.39 | 2.58 |
| 8 | Bangladesh | 7.01 | 7.08 | 1.01 | 2.50 |
| 9 | Germany | 6.29 | 6.83 | 8.57 | 2.41 |
| 10 | Australia | 5.87 | 5.51 | (-)6.13 | 1.94 |
|  | Total Exports | 278.26 | 283.70 | 1.95 | 100.00 |

Source: DGCI&S, P stands for provisional

Top 10 Import Sources of India in 2023-24

(Values in US$ billion)

| S. No | Country | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | China | 98.51 | 101.74 | 3.28 | 15.00 |
| 2 | Russia | 46.21 | 61.16 | 32.34 | 9.02 |
| 3 | U A E | 53.23 | 48.03 | (-)9.78 | 7.08 |
| 4 | U S A | 50.86 | 42.20 | (-)17.04 | 6.22 |
| 5 | Saudi Arab | 42.04 | 31.42 | (-)25.26 | 4.63 |
| 6 | Iraq | 34.39 | 29.96 | (-)12.87 | 4.42 |
| 7 | Indonesia | 28.82 | 23.41 | (-)18.77 | 3.45 |
| 8 | Switzerland | 15.79 | 21.25 | 34.53 | 3.13 |
| 9 | Singapore | 23.60 | 21.20 | (-)10.15 | 3.13 |
| 10 | Korea Rp | 21.23 | 21.14 | (-)0.43 | 3.12 |
|  | Total Imports | 715.97 | 678.21 | (-)5.27 | 100.00 |

Source: DGCI&S

Top 10 Import Sources of India in April-November 2024 (P)

| S. No | Country | Apr-Nov 2023 | Apr-Nov 2024(P) | Growth(%) | Share(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | China | 68.02 | 74.42 | 9.41 | 15.75 |
| 2 | Russia | 40.20 | 43.91 | 9.21 | 9.29 |
| 3 | U A E | 27.83 | 40.14 | 44.22 | 8.50 |
| 4 | U S A | 29.34 | 29.63 | 0.97 | 6.27 |
| 5 | Saudi Arab | 20.47 | 19.62 | (-)4.15 | 4.15 |
| 6 | Iraq | 19.10 | 19.05 | (-)0.23 | 4.03 |
| 7 | Indonesia | 15.40 | 16.20 | 5.17 | 3.43 |
| 8 | Switzerland | 15.54 | 15.45 | (-)0.59 | 3.27 |
| 9 | Korea Rp | 14.41 | 14.26 | (-)1.02 | 3.02 |
| 10 | Singapore | 14.52 | 13.91 | (-)4.22 | 2.94 |
|  | Total Imports | 449.24 | 472.53 | 5.19 | 100.00 |

---

7. TRENDS IN REGIONAL EXPORTS

Over the period from FY 2015 to FY 2024, there has 
been a noticeable shift in India’s regional exports.

The export shift across different regions is shown in 
the following table.

Region-wise Exports

| Region | 2014-15 | 2018-19 | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | Apr-Nov 2024(P) | Share in 2014-15 | Share in 2023-24 | Share in Apr-Nov 2024(P) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NAFTA | 47.52 | 59.12 | 87.85 | 86.69 | 59.54 | 15.31 | 19.83 | 20.99 |
| EU | 40.18 | 47.87 | 74.85 | 75.94 | 50.66 | 12.95 | 17.37 | 17.86 |
| West Asia-GCC | 49.30 | 41.62 | 51.31 | 56.32 | 36.63 | 15.88 | 12.89 | 12.91 |
| ASEAN | 31.81 | 37.48 | 44.00 | 41.21 | 27.36 | 10.25 | 9.43 | 9.65 |
| NE Asia | 37.82 | 41.98 | 40.02 | 38.36 | 22.32 | 12.19 | 8.78 | 7.87 |
| South Asia | 20.48 | 25.35 | 28.03 | 25.62 | 16.32 | 6.60 | 5.86 | 5.75 |
| Other European Countries | 14.86 | 14.97 | 21.57 | 21.00 | 13.66 | 4.79 | 4.80 | 4.81 |
| Latin America | 11.53 | 9.74 | 17.71 | 14.50 | 10.00 | 3.71 | 3.32 | 3.52 |
| West Africa | 6.98 | 7.70 | 17.73 | 12.84 | 8.23 | 2.25 | 2.94 | 2.9 |
| East Africa | 10.15 | 7.38 | 11.07 | 11.40 | 6.82 | 3.27 | 2.61 | 2.4 |
| East Asia(Oceania) | 3.22 | 4.03 | 7.71 | 8.69 | 6.11 | 1.04 | 1.99 | 2.15 |
| Southern African Customs Union(SACU) | 5.53 | 4.38 | 8.92 | 9.30 | 5.54 | 1.78 | 2.13 | 1.95 |
| Other West Asia | 11.19 | 10.76 | 16.46 | 11.85 | 5.46 | 3.60 | 2.71 | 1.92 |
| North Africa | 5.71 | 5.89 | 8.35 | 7.21 | 4.48 | 1.84 | 1.65 | 1.58 |
| Other CIS Countries | 2.79 | 3.02 | 3.76 | 4.87 | 3.89 | 0.90 | 1.11 | 1.37 |
| Other South African Countries | 3.21 | 1.86 | 3.57 | 3.09 | 1.56 | 1.04 | 0.71 | 0.55 |
| European Free Trade Association(EFTA) | 1.35 | 1.53 | 1.93 | 1.94 | 1.29 | 0.44 | 0.44 | 0.45 |
| Central Africa | 1.25 | 1.34 | 1.57 | 1.49 | 0.90 | 0.40 | 0.34 | 0.32 |
| CARs Countries | 0.60 | 0.44 | 0.91 | 0.74 | 0.61 | 0.19 | 0.17 | 0.22 |
| India&#x27;s Total Exports | 310.34 | 330.08 | 451.07 | 437.07 | 283.70 | 100.00 | 100.00 | 100.00 |

(Values in US$ billion)

Source: DGCI&S, P stands for provisional

The top five regions, where significant increase in 
export share observed between FY 2015 and FY 
2024, are discussed below in detail:

(A) NAFTA

export share going to NAFTA has climbed from 15.31 
per cent in FY 2015 to 19.83 per cent in FY 2024, with 
export values rising from US$ 47.52 billion to US$ 
86.69 billion during the same period. The USA is the 
biggest driver of India’s exports to this region, with 
its share increasing from 13.68 per cent to 17.74 per 
cent in India’s exports during this period.

export share going to NAFTA has climbed from 15.31 
per cent in FY 2015 to 19.83 per cent in FY 2024, with 
export values rising from US$ 47.52 billion to US$ 
86.69 billion during the same period. The USA is the 
biggest driver of India’s exports to this region, with 
its share increasing from 13.68 per cent to 17.74 per 
cent in India’s exports during this period.

---

Exports to NAFTA

Source: DGCI&S

(B) European Union

European Union's share in India's exports has increased significantly, from 12.95 per cent in FY 2015 to 17.37 per cent in FY 2024.In terms of value, India's exports to the EU rose from US$ 40.2 billion to US $ 75.9 billion. When looking at specific nations, India's

export share to the Netherlands has climbed from 2 per cent to 5.1 per cent, showing a stronger trading partnership with this EU member. India's export share to Italy increased marginally from 1.6 per cent to 2 per cent during the same reference period. However, the export shares of other countries have remained relatively unchanged.

Exports to European Union

(C) East Asia (Oceania)

India's exports to East Asia surged significantly during the last decade, from US$ 3.22 billion in FY 2015 to US$ 8.69 billion in FY 2024.East Asia's export share in India's exports increased from 1.04 per cent to 1.99

Exports to East Asia (Oceania)

per cent between FY 2015 and FY 2024. Australia, New Zealand, and Timor-Leste are the main drivers of this increase in this region. The following graph depicts the export growth in East Asia and its driving countries during the last decade.

Department of Commerce

---

It is interesting to note that, the export growth in 
Timor Leste was highest, at a rate of 1382.1 per cent 
between FY 2015 and FY 2024.

(D) West Africa

of West Africa in India’s exports has climbed from 
2.25 per cent in FY 2015 to 2.94 per cent in FY 2024, 
with export values rising from US$ 6.98 billion to 
US$ 12.84 billion in the same period. Nigeria, Togo, 
and Ghana are the primary countries pushing India’s 
exports to this region. Togo experienced the greatest 
gain in export share, from 9.9 per cent in FY 2015 to 
25.1 per cent in FY 2024.

Exports to West Africa

Source: DGCI&S

(E) Southern African Customs Union (SACU)

India’s exports to SACU countries have increased 
by 68 per cent between FY 2015 and FY 2024. The 
export value has climbed from US$ 5.53 billion in FY

2015 to US$ 9.3 billion in FY 2024. As a result, the 
share of India’s exports going to SACU climbed from 
1.78 per cent to 2.13 per cent during the same period. 
South Africa, Namibia, and Botswana are the primary 
countries driving India’s exports to the region.

Exports to SACU

Pharmaceuticals and Petroleum Products. The share 
of  Electronic Goods in  India’s merchandise  exports 
increased by 4.65 per cent (from 2.02 per cent in 
2014-15 to 6.66 per cent in 2023-24). The export 
shift across different QE commodities is shown in the 
following table.

---

QE Commodity-wise Exports

(Values in US$ billion)

| QE Commodity | 2014-15 | 2018-19 | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | Apr-Dec 2024(P) | Share in 2014-15 | Share in 2023-24 | Share in Apr-Dec 2024(P) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Engineering goods | 73.07 | 83.62 | 107.04 | 109.30 | 87.22 | 23.55 | 25.01 | 27.11 |
| Petroleum products | 56.79 | 46.55 | 97.47 | 84.16 | 49.01 | 18.30 | 19.25 | 15.23 |
| Electronic goods | 6.26 | 8.83 | 23.55 | 29.12 | 26.12 | 2.02 | 6.66 | 8.12 |
| Gems and jewellery | 41.27 | 40.25 | 37.96 | 32.71 | 21.36 | 13.30 | 7.48 | 6.64 |
| Drugs and pharmaceuticals | 15.43 | 19.15 | 25.39 | 27.85 | 21.70 | 4.97 | 6.37 | 6.74 |
| Organic and inorganic chemicals | 14.43 | 22.38 | 30.34 | 29.38 | 21.24 | 4.65 | 6.72 | 6.60 |
| Others | 17.46 | 18.71 | 29.39 | 24.22 | 18.35 | 5.63 | 5.54 | 5.70 |
| Rmg of all textiles | 16.83 | 16.14 | 16.19 | 14.53 | 11.32 | 5.42 | 3.32 | 3.52 |
| Cotton yarn/fabs./madeups, handloom products etc. | 10.77 | 11.22 | 10.95 | 11.68 | 8.91 | 3.47 | 2.67 | 2.77 |
| Rice | 7.85 | 7.75 | 11.14 | 10.42 | 8.73 | 2.53 | 2.38 | 2.71 |
| Plastic and linoleum | 5.75 | 8.61 | 8.37 | 8.09 | 6.70 | 1.85 | 1.85 | 2.08 |
| Marine products | 5.51 | 6.80 | 8.08 | 7.37 | 5.68 | 1.78 | 1.69 | 1.76 |
| Man-made yarn/fabs./madeups etc. | 5.28 | 4.98 | 4.95 | 4.68 | 3.61 | 1.70 | 1.07 | 1.12 |
| Mica, coal and other ores, minerals including process | 3.90 | 4.25 | 5.16 | 4.68 | 3.52 | 1.26 | 1.07 | 1.09 |
| Meat, dairy and poultry products | 5.39 | 4.36 | 4.03 | 4.53 | 3.65 | 1.74 | 1.04 | 1.13 |
| Leather and leather manufactures | 6.03 | 5.14 | 4.75 | 4.28 | 3.31 | 1.94 | 0.98 | 1.03 |
| Spices | 2.43 | 3.32 | 3.79 | 4.25 | 3.16 | 0.78 | 0.97 | 0.98 |
| Ceramic products and glassware | 1.64 | 2.65 | 3.74 | 4.28 | 3.00 | 0.53 | 0.98 | 0.93 |
| Fruits and vegetables | 2.15 | 2.54 | 3.21 | 3.66 | 2.66 | 0.69 | 0.84 | 0.83 |
| Cereal preparations and miscellaneous processed item | 1.26 | 1.56 | 2.62 | 2.85 | 2.30 | 0.41 | 0.65 | 0.72 |
| Iron ore | 0.52 | 1.32 | 1.80 | 3.91 | 1.49 | 0.17 | 0.90 | 0.46 |

Department of Commerce

---

| QE Commodity | 2014-15 | 2018-19 | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | Apr-Dec 2024(P) | Share in 2014-15 | Share in 2023-24 | Share in Apr-Dec 2024(P) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Coffee | 0.81 | 0.82 | 1.15 | 1.29 | 1.25 | 0.26 | 0.29 | 0.39 |
| Carpet | 1.36 | 1.48 | 1.37 | 1.40 | 1.15 | 0.44 | 0.32 | 0.36 |
| Oil meals | 1.32 | 1.51 | 1.60 | 1.71 | 1.02 | 0.43 | 0.39 | 0.32 |
| Oil seeds | 1.74 | 1.16 | 1.34 | 1.44 | 1.01 | 0.56 | 0.33 | 0.31 |
| Tea | 0.68 | 0.83 | 0.82 | 0.83 | 0.69 | 0.22 | 0.19 | 0.21 |
| Jute mfg.Including floor covering | 0.30 | 0.32 | 0.44 | 0.34 | 0.28 | 0.10 | 0.08 | 0.09 |
| Cashew | 0.91 | 0.65 | 0.36 | 0.34 | 0.25 | 0.29 | 0.08 | 0.08 |
| Other cereals | 0.87 | 0.35 | 1.19 | 0.52 | 0.19 | 0.28 | 0.12 | 0.06 |
| India&#x27;s Total Exports | 310.35 | 330.08 | 451.07 | 437.07 | 321.71 | 100.00 | 100.00 | 100.00 |

Share of QE commodities with significant increase in share in India’s total exports over the years (%)

---

4
Chapter

FOREIGN TRADE POLICY AND 
MAJOR SCHEMES

Department of Commerce

---

Annual Report 2024-25

1. INTRODUCTION

The Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) for the period 2015-
20 was replaced by a new Foreign Trade Policy in 
2023. The new Foreign Trade Policy came into effect 
st
on 1 April 2023, following extensive discussions and 
consideration of suggestions received from Export 
Promotion Councils, leading exporters, and industry 
bodies, given the prevailing volatile global economic 
and geopolitical scenarios. The Foreign Trade Policy 
2023 continues time-tested WTO-compatible 
schemes that facilitate exports and is designed to be 
nimble and responsive to trade needs.

The policy includes the Foreign Trade Policy, Handbook 
of Procedures, Appendices, and Aayat-Niryat forms 
etc. While the FTP sets out the policies and schemes 
for imports and exports, the Handbook of Procedures

outlines the procedures to be followed by exporters, 
importers, licensing/regional authorities, or any 
relevant authority for implementing the provisions of 
the Foreign Trade Policy.

India has graduated from the list of Annex VII(b) of 
the WTO’s Subsidies and Countervailing Measures 
Agreement, therefore, now the thrust in the new 
FTP 2023 is towards WTO-compatible initiatives and 
schemes for creating an enabling ecosystem that 
supports the philosophy of “Atmanirbhar Bharat” 
(self-reliant India) and promotes local products 
globally. FTP 2023 also emphasizes the need for 
collaborative partnerships with State Governments 
to promote exports at the District level through 
awareness campaigns, capacity building, outreach 
programs, and infrastructure upgrades.

2. FOREIGN TRADE POLICY OBJECTIVE

Release of FTP-2023

Various initiatives undertaken by the Directorate 
General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) and the 
Department of Commerce to boost exports from 
India are guided by the ideals, principles, and policies

articulated by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India. 
These initiatives include opening new sectors for 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), improving the 
business environment, removing regulatory barriers, 
recognizing startups, and introducing schemes like the Production Linked Incentive Scheme to enhance 
production, attract investments, and create jobs.

The aim of the new FTP 2023 initiatives is to establish 
a predictable and equitable environment, promote 
best and sustainable trade practices, achieve deeper, 
wider, and more value-added penetration into global 
markets, enhance efficiency and ease of doing 
business by reducing transaction costs, and integrate 
India into the global value chains. The Government 
intends to introduce groundbreaking reforms to 
strengthen relations with different countries, setting 
a robust foundation to achieve its strategic vision of 
becoming a global export hub.

FTP 2023 is dynamic and evolutionary and has been 
formulated based on WTO rules looking at the needs 
of trade and industry. Efforts have been made to 
streamline the closure/regularization of old pending 
cases under Amnesty.

3. MAJOR SCHEMES

(A) Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported 
Products (RoDTEP)

v	 Scheme for Remission of Duties and Taxes 
on Exported Products (RoDTEP) creates a 
mechanism for reimbursement of taxes/duties/
levies, which are currently not being refunded 
under any other mechanism, at the central, 
state and local level, but which are incurred in 
the process of manufacture and distribution of 
exported products. The major component of 
such taxes is electricity duty and VAT on fuels 
used in transportation/distribution.

v	 The schedule of eligible export items under 
RoDTEP is notified under Appendix 4R which 
contains 10,642 eligible export items (HS lines 
at 8-digit level) and their corresponding rates 
of remission.

v	 RoDTEP scheme operates under a budgetary 
framework and Rs. 17,951 crore has been 
allocated for implementing the scheme in FY 
2024-25 as per RBE 2024-25. Under RoDTEP 
st
scheme, from 1  April 2021 till November 
2024, the benefit of Rs. 53,549 crore has been 
granted to the exporters.

(B) Duty Remission Schemes

Duty neutralization/remission schemes are based on 
the principle and the commitment of the Government 
that “Goods and Services are to be exported and 
not the Taxes and Levies”. The purpose is to allow 
duty-free import/procurement of inputs or to allow 
replenishment either for the inputs used or the duty 
component on inputs used. A brief of these schemes 
is given below:

(i) Advance Authorization (AA) Scheme

Advance Authorization (AA) is a WTO-compliant 
duty exemption scheme detailed under Chapter 
4 of the New Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2023. AA 
scheme allows duty-free import of inputs, which are 
physically incorporated or used in the making of the 
export product. Under the AA scheme, all import 
duties on inputs, such as Basic Customs duty, IGST, 
Cess, Anti-dumping duty etc., are exempted. Also, 
local procurement of inputs in place of direct imports 
is allowed under AA wherein IGST for input supplies 
are refunded. The required quantity of inputs is 
calculated based on Standard Input Output Norms 
(SION). AA is used where an applicant generally 
imports first and then uses the imported inputs in his 
exports. However, authorization holders can import 
the inputs on a replenishment basis also.

---

be maintained under this scheme. Proof of exports 
needs to be submitted to regional authorities of 
DGFT along with proof of realized payment in foreign 
currency after the completion of exports for the 
redemption of AA and RA issues Export Obligation 
Discharge Certificate (EODC).

(ii) Duty-Free Import Authorization (DFIA)

st
Under the DFIA Scheme operational from 1 May 
2006, Duty Free Import Authorization shall be issued 
on post export basis for products for which Standard 
Input Output Norms (SION) have been notified, once 
the export is completed. One of the objectives of the 
scheme is to facilitate the transfer of the authorization 
or the inputs imported as per SION after exports are 
completed. Provisions of the DFIA Scheme are similar 
to the Advance Authorization scheme. Minimum 
value addition of 20 per cent is required under the 
scheme. For items where higher value addition has 
been prescribed under Advance Authorization in the 
Appendix, the same value addition shall be applicable 
for DFIA also. Pre-export DFIA has been discontinued 
in FTP 2015-20.

economic slowdown. Duty-free import/procurement 
of precious metal (Gold/Silver/Platinum) from the 
nominated agencies is allowed either in advance or 
as replenishment. Duty Free Import Authorisation 
Scheme shall not be available for Gems and Jewellery 
Sector.  The Schemes for Gems and Jewellery Sector 
are as follows:

Gems & Jewellery exports constitute a major 
portion of our total merchandise exports. It is an 
employment-oriented sector. Exports from this 
sector suffered significantly on account of the global

v	 Advance Procurement/replenishment of 
Precious Metals from Nominated Agencies

v	 Replenishment Authorisation for Gems

v	 Replenishment Authorisation for Consumables

v	 Advance Authorisation for Precious Metals

In view of the demand raised by the industry, findings 
like posts, pushbacks, and locks which help in 
collating the jewellery pieces together, containing 
gold of 3 carats and above up to a maximum limit 
of 22 carats have also been allowed under duty 
exemption scheme.

With a view to preventing its misuse, the Advance 
authorisation scheme for the import of precious 
metals for exports of gold medallions and coins and 
fully mechanized jewellery has been discontinued.

(iv) Issuance of Authorization under Duty 
Remission Schemes

| Duty Remission Schemes |  | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | 2024-25( April-November 2024) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Advance Authorization | Number of Authorization | 22,322 | 23,339 | 16,844 |
| CIF Value of Imports | 2,48,599 | 2,95,269 | 183,825 |  |
| FOB Value of Exports | 5,01,528 | 5,09,346 | 308,845 |  |
| Duty Free Import Authorization (DFIA) | Number of Authorization | 2,046 | 2,882 | 1,862 |
| CIF Value of Imports | 5,442 | 8,023 | 5,718 |  |
| FOB Value of Exports | 7,277 | 12,313 | 6,487 |  |

Authorizations are issued under the various 
schemes, viz., Advance Authorization and Duty-Free 
Import Authorization (DFIA). Details of number of 
authorizations issued, CIF value of imports and FOB 
value of exports under various schemes during 2022-
23, 2023-24 and April-November, 2024-25 are given 
in the following table:

(Values in Rs. crore)

---

Following figure depicts the number of authorizations issued under various export promotion schemes

during 2022-23,2023-24 and April-November 2024- 25.

Following figure depicts the CIF value of import under various export promotion schemes during 2022-23,

2023-24 and April-November 2024-25.

DB Value of Export under Duty Remission Scheme

---

Following figure depicts the percentage share of 
various export promotion schemes in issuance of 
total number of scrips during April-November 2024-
25. It shows that the highest share of 49.00 per cent

scrips was issued under AA Scheme during April-
November 2024-25 followed by EPCG scheme with 
35.06 per cent.

Percentage share of various schemes in issuance of scripts/authorisations during April-November 2024-25

The Interest Equalization Scheme has been 
formulated to give the benefit in the interest rates 
being charged by the banks to the exporters on 
their Pre and Post Shipment Rupee Export Credits. 
The scheme was launched w.e.f 1st  April 2015 for a 
period of 5 years and later extended, from time to 
time, by the Cabinet approval till 30th June 2024 and 
further partially extended for MSME Manufacturer 
Exporters till 31st December 2024 by the Department 
of Expenditure for enabling Indian manufacturer 
exporters to be globally competitive by getting 
access to credits at rates comparable to peer 
countries. The broad objective of the scheme is to 
provide of rupee credit to exporters for pre-shipment 
and post-shipment activities at competitive rates.

rate to the exporters is reimbursed to the RBI by 
DGFT/Department of Commerce for its onward 
release to the concerned Scheduled Commercial 
Banks and Urban Cooperative Banks”.

(D) Export Promotion of Capital Goods (EPCG) 
Scheme

The objective of the EPCG Scheme is to facilitate 
import of capital goods for producing quality goods 
and services and enhance India’s manufacturing 
competitiveness. EPCG Scheme allows import of 
capital goods (except those specified in negative 
list in Appendix 5 F) for pre- production, production, 
and post- production at zero customs duty. Capital 
goods imported under EPCG Authorisation for 
physical exports are also exempt from IGST and 
Compensation Cess. The Authorisation holder may 
also procure Capital Goods from indigenous sources 
in accordance with provisions of paragraph 5.07 of 
FTP. Authorisation shall be valid for import for 24 
months from the date of issue of Authorisation.

---

Capital goods for the purpose of the EPCG scheme 
shall include:

v	 Computer systems and software which are a 
part of the Capital Goods being imported.

v	 Spares, moulds, dies, jigs, fixtures, tools & 
refractories; and

v	 Catalysts for initial charge plus one subsequent 
charge.

EPCG scheme covers manufacturer exporters with 
or without supporting manufacturer(s), merchant 
exporters tied to supporting manufacturer(s) and 
service providers. Export Promotion Capital Goods 
(EPCG) Scheme also covers a service provider who is 
certified as a Common Service Provider (CSP) by the 
DGFT – HQs, Department of Commerce in a Town of 
Export Excellence or Prime Minister Mega Integrated 
Textile Region and apparel Parks (PM MITRA).

Import under EPCG Scheme shall be subject to an 
Export Obligation (EO) equivalent to 6 times of duties, 
taxes and cess saved on capital goods, to be fulfilled in 
6 years reckoned from date of issue of Authorisation. 
EO shall be fulfilled by the Authorisation holder 
through export of goods which are manufactured 
by him, or his supporting manufacturer / service 
rendered by him, for which the EPCG authorisation 
has been granted. EO under the scheme shall be, over 
and above, the average level of exports achieved by 
the applicant in the preceding three licensing years 
for the same and similar products within the overall 
EO period including extended period, if any; such

average would be the arithmetic mean of export 
performance in the preceding three licensing years 
for same and similar products. EO may be fulfilled 
both by physical exports as well as deemed exports. 
Deemed export supplies shall also be eligible for 
benefits available under paragraph 7.03 of FTP.

With a view to accelerating exports, in cases where 
Authorisation holder has fulfilled 75 per cent or 
more of specific export obligation and 100 per cent 
of Average Export Obligation till date, if any, in 
half or less than half the original export obligation 
period specified, remaining export obligation shall 
be condoned. For exporters of Green Technology 
Products, Specific EO shall be 75 per cent of EO 
as stipulated. For manufacturing units located in 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh, specific EO shall be 25 per cent 
of the EO.

In the FTP, 2023, Dairy sector has been exempted 
from maintaining Average Export Obligation. The 
PM MITRA scheme has been added as an additional 
scheme eligible to claim benefits under CSP Scheme 
of EPCG. Further, Battery Electric Vehicles (BEV) of 
all types, Vertical Farming equipment, Wastewater 
Treatment and Recycling, Rainwater harvesting 
system and Rainwater Filters, and Green Hydrogen are 
added to Green Technology products i.e. they will be 
eligible for reduced Export Obligation requirement.

Details of the Authorization issued under EPCG 
Scheme for the years 2022-23 and 2023-24, and 
2024-25 (April-November) are given in the table as 
follow:

Issuance under Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme

| Issuance under Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Years | 2022-23 | 2023-24 | 2024-25(Apr-Nov) |
| Number of Authorization | 13825 | 16230 | 12051 |
| Duty Foregone Amount | 7567 | 7147 | 15479 |
| FOB value of Export | 145659 | 183727 | 89692 |

---

Issuance under Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme

(E) Export Oriented Hardware Technolo Software Technology Parks

Units (EOUs), Electronics Biology Parks (EHTPs),gy Parks (STPs) and Bio-3TPs)

Under this scheme, the EOUs etc. are permitted to import and/or procure from DTA or bonded warehouse in DTA or from an international exhibition held in India without payment of customs duty as provided under the first schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and additional duty, if any, of Customs leviable under Section 3(1), 3(3) and 3(5) and without payment of Integrated Tax and GST compensation cess leviable under section 3(7) and 3(9) of the said Act as per notification issued by the Department of Revenue. An Export Oriented Units (EOUs)/Electronics Hardware and Technology Park (EHTP)/Software Technology Park (STP)/Bio-Technology Park (BTP) unit may export all kinds of goods and services except items that are prohibited in Indian Trade Classification based on Harmonized System (ITC-HS). EOU/EHTP/ STP/BTP unit shall be a positive net foreign exchange

earner. Entire production of EOU/EHTP/STP/BTP units shall be exported, but some exemptions are allowed subject to the conditions specified in FTP/HBP.

The EOUs can also procure excisable goods, falling in fourth schedule of Central Excise Act, 1944 from DTA either under exemption or under refund route. Supplies from DTA to EOU/EHTP/STP/BTP units for use in their manufacture for exports are eligible for "Deemed Export benefits under Chapter 7 of Foreign Trade Policy". The scheme to reimburse the CST has been extended for the period 2021-22 to 2025- 26 with total outlay of Rs.302.35 crore. Out of the amount of Rs.72 crore allocated for the FY 2024- 25, an amount of Rs.58.77 crore has been utilized till November 2024.

Deemed exports are those transactions/supplies in which goods supplied do not leave the country and payment for such supplies is received either in Indian rupees or in free foreign exchange. The deemed export scheme is one of the effective instruments to incentivize domestic production-led exports and provide a level playing field to domestic manufacturers in certain specified cases, strengthen domestic production and boost economic activities develop the skills of domestic human resources (Make in India) and generate employment.

---

(i) Objectives

v	 To provide a level-playing field to 
domestic manufacturers  in certain 
specified cases, as may be decided by 
the Government from time to time and 
promote domestic industry.

v	 To provide duty free imports and 
duty exemption/refund  for  products 
manufactured in India.

v	 To reduce the dependency on imports

(ii) Categories of Supply eligible for Duty 
Drawback on Deemed Exports

v	 Supply of inputs against Advance 
Authorization through Advance 
Release Order (ARO) route - Drawback 
is refunded only if an ARO has been 
issued under the Advance Authorization 
making the Authorisation invalid for 
direct import and allowing procurement 
indigenously (domestic market).

(iii) Refund under Drawback and Terminal Excise 
Duty (TED) for deemed exports

v	 Supply of capital goods sourced 
from indigenous supplier (through 
invalidation, if no Advance Authorisation 
is taken against invalidation) under 
EPCG Authorisation for which drawback 
is refunded.

v	 Supply of goods to projects financed 
by multilateral or bilateral Agencies 
under International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB), turnkey contracts, 
Projects under Customs Notification 
th
No. 50/2017-Customs dated 30 June 
2017, Projects under United Nations or 
International organization and nuclear 
power projects through National 
Competitive Bidding or ICB.

taxes and duties are imposed. This is 
done to ensure that the exports are not 
burdened with taxes & duties, and can 
compete in the international market. 
Similarly, the deemed exports are also 
zero rated, and to ensure this universal 
principle, the taxes and duties imposed 
on inputs/capital goods etc. supplied 
under deemed exports are either 
exempted or refunded.

v	 Zero rating of deemed exports under 
the scheme of Drawback/TED, wherever 
exemption is not allowed, the refund of 
custom duty and central excise duty (as 
per Schedule 4 of Central Excise Act, 
1944) paid on such supplies is refunded 
through the route of All Industry Rate 
(AIR) drawback fixed by Department of 
Revenue (DoR) or under the Brand Rate 
fixation route.

v	 After introduction of GST regime, only 
few items (such as fuel) attract Central 
Excise Duty (as per Schedule 4 of Central 
Excise Act, 1944) for which TED refund 
is provided. For refund of drawback and 
TED, apart from provisions of Chapter-7 
of FTP/HBP, the Customs and Central 
Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 1995 as 
amended in 2017 are also applicable.

The scheme to refund the TED/DBK has been 
extended for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26 
with total outlay of Rs. 695 crore.

v	 Out of the total amount of Rs. 150 crore 
allocated for the financial year 2022-23, 
an amount of Rs 20.12 crore was utilized 
st st
from 1  January 2023 till 31  March 2023. 
v	 Out of the total amount of Rs. 140 crore

---

4. MONITORING OF EXPORT PROMOTION 
SCHEMES AND DATA ANALYTICS

For effective monitoring and evaluation of the 
Foreign Trade Policy (FTP), a comprehensive 
Management Information System (MIS) Report on 
Export Promotion Schemes 2024 was brought out 
by Statistics Division of DGFT. The MIS report is also 
being compiled on monthly basis which is available 
in DGFT website under Statistics Report on the 
Home page and the link is https://www.dgft.gov.in/
CP/?opt=bulletin-foreign-trade-statisics. A detailed 
visualization of issuance of scrips and authorisations 
under various export promotion schemes is 
available at the link https://dashboard.commerce.
gov.in/commercedashboard.aspx in the Monitoring 
Dashboard on Department of Commerce website.

Since the constitution of a Data Analysis Unit (DAU) 
in Statistics Division of DGFT after mid-term review 
of FTP (2015-20) in December 2017, a Monthly 
Bulletin on Foreign Trade Statistics that provides a 
ready reference and analysis on export and import 
data of India on major commodities and major 
countries at Quick Estimates, Provisional Estimates 
and Final 8 digit level estimates is being brought out. 
The Bulletin also provides the State-wise export data, 
which is available in DGFT website under Statistics 
Report on the Home page and the link is https://www.
dgft.gov.in/CP/?opt=bulletin-foreign-trade-statisics. 
Data Analytics Unit (DAU), Statistics Division, DGFT 
has developed two Dashboards namely Monitoring 
Dashboard of Department of Commerce and Data 
Analytics Dashboard.

5. TARGET SETTING AND MONITORING FOR 
MERCHANDISE EXPORT 2024-25

Due to close monitoring at all levels, supported by

export promotion measures, Merchandise exports 
from India crossed US$ 400 billion in last three 
consecutive years and managed to break the barrier 
of US$ 330 billion which was the highest in the past.

India’s merchandise export amounted to US$ 281.97 
billion during the period April-November for the year 
2024-25. Further, for the FY April-November (2024-
25) the export of US$ 281.97 billion was disaggregated 
in terms of regions and countries as well as product/
commodity groups. The Department of Commerce 
prepared a detailed strategy for achieving the targets 
and an elaborate monitoring system was put in place.

With close monitoring by country/region/mission/
products/commodity groups/Export Promotion 
Councils at different levels, supported by export 
promotion measures, in the April-November (2024-
25), India has achieved exports of US$ 281.97 billion, 
which is 60.2 per cent of the provisional export target 
of US$ 468.23 billion.

In addition, to supplement the offline monitoring 
of export performance, a real time online
monitoring system for the designated export 
target (for 200 Countries/territories by 31
commodity groups), via a digitized data-driven 
framework for facilitating timely policy making /
interventions in international trade, a portal-NIRYAT 
(National Import-Export Record for Yearly Analysis 
of Trade) has been developed and is available at the 
domain name: https://niryat.gov.in. It is accessible 
to Government Stakeholders (including Embassies/
HCs/Missions) and Export Promotion Councils 
(EPCs)/Commodity Boards/Authorities, etc. through 
individual login and password, for regular monitoring 
of the export performance of their respective 
jurisdictions and to take necessary action, wherever 
required.

6. NIRYAT BANDHU SCHEME

Niryat Bandhu Scheme is a Central Sector Scheme 
which commenced in 2013. Training programs 
under Niryat Bandhu Scheme, being implemented 
in in-person and online mode caters to the initial 
skilling needs of  individuals/firms who venture into 
International Trade. As part of the Niryat Bandhu 
Scheme, more than one lakh individuals (1,15,000 
plus) across the length and breadth of the Country 
have been trained since 2013-14.

---

7. MATTERS RELATED TO EXPORTS

(A) Districts as Export Hubs

The Department of Commerce through the 
Directorate General of Foreign Trade is working 
with the States and the Districts to channelise the 
potential and diverse identity in each District of our 
country to make them export hubs. The Districts as 
Export Hubs is aimed at targeting export promotion, 
manufacturing and employment generation at the 
grass roots level, making the States and Districts 
meaningful stakeholders and active participants 
in making India an export powerhouse thereby 
contributing to the AtmaNirbhar mission and 
achieving the vision of Make in India for the world 
and being Vocal for Local, by significantly increasing 
the manufacturing and exports from urban areas 
while focusing on generating interest and economic 
activity in the rural hinterland and small towns in 
the country to push new businesses to export. A 
growing focus on exports by focusing on districts as 
potential export hubs is also likely to integrate India 
more closely with the global value chain and propel 
India to be a significant exporter by leveraging the 
diversity and competitiveness in agriculture, marine, 
textile, pharmaceutical, chemicals and a whole lot of 
engineering products.
Towards this goal, Products/services (including GI

Towards this goal, Products/services (including GI 
products, agricultural clusters, toy clusters etc.) with 
export potential in all the districts of the country have 
been identified and institutional mechanism in the 
form of State Export Promotion Committees (SEPC) 
at State/UT level and District Export Promotion 
Committees (DEPCs) at the District level has been 
created in all Districts of the country to provide support 
for export promotion and address the bottlenecks for 
export growth in the Districts. The primary function 
of the DEPC is to prepare and implement District 
specific Export Action Plans (DEAPs) in collaboration 
with all the relevant stakeholders from the Centre, 
State and the District.

been constituted in all 36 States/UTs. District Action 
Plans drafted for 590 districts. Products/Services 
with export potential identified in 734 Districts.

(B) Rupee Trade

The Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) 
has amended the Foreign Trade Policy vide 
th
Notification No. 33/2015-20 dated 16 September 
2022, to allow for International Trade Settlement 
in Indian Rupees (INR) i.e., invoicing, payment, and 
settlement of exports/ imports in Indian Rupees 
in sync with RBl’s A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.10 
th
dated 11 July 2022. Further changes have been 
introduced in the Foreign Trade Policy vide DGFT 
th
Notification 43/2015-20 dated 9 November 2022 
th
and Public Notice 35/2015-20 dated 9 November 
2022 for grant of exports benefits and fulfilment of 
Export Obligation for export realization in Indian 
Rupees as per the RBI guidelines. Given the rise in 
interest in internationalization of Indian Rupee, the 
given Policy amendments have been undertaken 
to facilitate and to bring ease in international trade 
transactions in Indian Rupees. The issue relating to 
Payments and Receipts on Imports/Exports have 
been detailed under Para 2.52 and 2.53 of Foreign 
Trade Policy, 2023.
Merchanting Trade

Merchanting Trade

The New Foreign Trade Policy has come into force 
st
w.e.f. 1 April 2023 after series of discussion and 
consideration of suggestions received requests 
from Export Promotion Councils, leading exporters, 
and industry bodies that in view of the prevailing, 
volatile global economic and geo-political scenario. 
The Foreign Trade Policy 2023 is a continuation of 
time-tested schemes facilitating exports as well as 
a document that is nimble and responsive to trade needs. The Government plans to focus on introducing 
path breaking reforms to strengthen its relations with 
different countries, which will help in setting a robust 
foundation to achieve its strategic vision of becoming 
an export hub globally.

(D) Stake Holder Consultations and Board of 
Trade Meeting

The Board of Trade (BOT) has been reconstituted 
by merging Council for Trade Development and 
Promotion with Board of Trade vide notification 
th
No. 11/2015-20 dated 17 July 2019.  The Board of 
Trade, inter alia, advises the Government on policy 
measures connected with the Foreign Trade Policy 
to achieve the objectives of boosting India’s trade. 
It provides a platform to state governments and UTs 
for articulating state-oriented perspectives on Trade 
Policy. It also acts as a platform to Government of 
India for appraising State Governments and UTs 
about international developments affecting India’s 
trade. It is an important mechanism for deliberations 
on trade related issues with industry bodies, 
associations, export promotion councils, and state 
and UT Governments. There were 29 new non-official 
members who were also invited for the first time in 
this Board of Trade meeting.

$$
1 7 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

Department of Commerce has regularly held 
stakeholder consultations with various Industry 
Associations, Export Promotion Councils.   As part 
of consultation, a Board of Trade meeting was held 
th
on 13 September 2024. The meeting was attended 
by Various State Ministers and Other Senior officials 
of key line Ministries and States, all major Trade and 
Industry Bodies, Export Promotion Councils and 
Industry Associations.

Industry Minister launched e-Platform “Initiative for 
Trade Connect Platform” during the meeting.

Ministers from states made interventions in the 
meeting, giving their state-specific suggestions, and 
expressed their support to the Central Government 
initiatives in promoting the external trade.

(E) Special Chemicals, Organism, Materials, 
Equipment and Technologies (SCOMET)

In consonance with the guidelines and controls list 
of the international conventions and obligation as 
well as multilateral export control regimes related 
to export of dual use goods and technologies, India 
has regulated the exports of dual use items, nuclear 
related items, including software and technology. 
SCOMET (Special Chemical, Organisms, Material, 
Equipment and Technologies) is India’s National 
Export Control List of dual use items munitions and 
nuclear related items munitions and nuclear related 
items, including software and technology maintained 
under Foreign Trade Policy and is aligned to the 
control lists of the all multilateral export control 
regimes and conventions including the Missile 
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), Wassenaar 
Arrangement and Australia Group. The SCOMET 
List has been notified by DGFT under appendix 3 to 
Schedule 2 of ITC (HS) Classification of Export and 
Import items. The SCOMET list was also updated in 
August 2023 as per the recent changes incorporated 
under various export control regimes. The provisions 
to control the dual use items have been incorporated 
in Chapter IV A of Foreign Trade (Development & 
Regulation) (FTDR) Act, 1992, as amended in 2010.

The SCOMET List is divided into nine categories of 
items from Category 0 to Category 8. The export 
of SCOMET items is regulated and can only be 
allowed against a SCOMET license issued by DGFT 
or other agency designated for the purpose. In the 
recent past, steps have been taken by DGFT to ease 
the process of licensing by making the applications 
process completely online, facilitating exporters by 
liberalising the SCOMET policy in case of certain 
goods and technologies, through bulk licensing and 
general authorisation provisions such as General 
Authorisation for export of Chemicals (GAEC), 
General Authorisation for export after repair in India

---

(GAER), General Authorisation for Inra Company Transfer (GAIC), General Authorisation for export of Droned (GAED), Repeat Order Authorisation, Stock and Sale Policy, General Authorization for Export of Telecommunication-related items under SCOMET Category 845 Part 1 (GAET), General Authorization for Export of Information Security items (GAEIS) under SCOMET Category 845 Part 2 and relevant amendments made under these General Authorizations to expand the scope of these policies for liberalizing exports of SCOMET items.

Multiple sector specific outreach events have also been organized in the past 1 year in different parts of the country focusing on sensitizing Indian Exporters regarding India's export control compliance and relevant SCOMET regulations. Recently, A National Conference on Strategic Trade Controls (NCSTC), was organized focusing on India's Strategic Trade Control (Export control) system and International best practices for export of dual-use goods and technologies.

(F) Export Authorization for Restricted Items

The Export Cell deals with Export Policy of various items under Schedule 2 of ITC(HS) Classification for Export and Import, categorized as "Free", "Restricted" or "Prohibited". The Export Policy of items are reviewed in consultation with the concerned subject commodity Division of the Department of Commerce & Ministry/Department concerned and notified time to time. Accordingly, Export Cell provides clarifications /interpretations on Export Policy of items whenever sought by individuals/firms/corpones or Ministry/Department/Organization concerned. Export of items categorized as 'Restricted' in Schedule 2 of ITC (HS) Classification for Export, is subject to Export Authorisation.

(i) Facilitative measures to boost exports

(a) Export Policy of Onions under ITC HS Code 07031019 was notified from 'Prohibited' to "Free" subject to MEP of USD 550/MT. Later the MEP was removed amending export policy as "Free". Export of additional 10000 MTs of onion to UAE was allowed through NCEL under G2G request.

(b) Export of essential commodities such as eggs, potatoes, onions, rice, wheat flour, sugar, dal, in the prescribed quantity was allowed and Export of stone aggregate and river sand was allowed through CAPEXIL to Maldives. Further, export of these commodities was notified to be permitted through 6 Custom Stations namely- Mundra, Tuticorin, Nhava Sheva (JNPT), ICD Tughlakabad, Kandala & Vishakhapatam Sea Ports.

(c) The time period for export of Broken Rice to Senegal & Gambia for the quantity notified vide Notification No. 46/2023 dated 30th November 2023 has been further extended till 31st January 2025.

(d) The policy condition of Non-Basmati & Basmati rice under ITC HS Code 10062000, 10063010, 10063090, 10064000 & 10063020 was revised as:

i. Export to EU Member States and European countries, namely United Kingdom, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland permitted subject to issuance of certificate of Inspection by Export Inspection Council/Export Inspection Agency

ii. Certificate of Inspection by Export Inspection Council/Export Inspection Agency shall not be mandatory for export to remaining European countries with effect from the date of Notification for a period of 6 months.

(e) Export Policy of Non-Basmati White Rice having ITCHS Code 1006 30 90 was notified on 28th September 2024 from "Prohibited" to "Free" subject to MEP of USD 490/MT. Later, the condition of MEP was also removed on 23rd October 2024 allowing export of non-basmati rice without any restriction. During the period of prohibition, export quota for 1000 MTs Kala Namak Rice under ITCHS Code 10063090 was allotted, export of

---

14,000 MT of non-Basmati white rice was permitted to Mauritius, 200000 MT of non- Basmati white rice to Malaysia and 1,000 MT of non-Basmati white rice to each of Namibia, Malawi, and Zimbabwe, all facilitated through NCEL.

(f) The Export Policy of De-oiled Rice Bran under chapter 23024000, 23069019, 23069029, 23069090 was notified from 'Free' to "Prohibited" till 31st January 2025.

(g) Allocation of 8606 MTRV of raw cane sugar to USA under TRQ Scheme for Fiscal Year 2025 and allocation of 5841 MTs of Sugar for EU for the year 2024-25 (October 2024-September 2025) was notified.

(h) The Export of red sanders wood by MoEF&CC (Government of Odisha) was re-notified for further 12 months i.e till 2nd September 2025.

(i) The policy condition for cough syrup under Chapter 30 was revised as:

i. Cough Syrup shall be permitted to be exported subject to the export sample being tested and production of Certificate of Analysis (CoA) issued by any of the following laboratories:
   Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh
   CDL, Kolkata, West Bengal
   CDTL, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
   CDTL, Mumbai, Maharashtra
   CDTL, Hyderabad, Telangana
   RDTL, Chandigarh
   RDTL, Guwahati, Assam
   Any NABL accredited State Drugs Testing Laboratory

Bee Pharmo Labs Pvt. Ltd Thane, C2 Hatkesh Udyog Nagar, Mira Bhayander Road, Mira Road (East), Thane-401107, Maharashtra

Oasis Test House, 24-A, B Sardar Patel, Industrial Estate, Narol, Ahmedabad-382407, Gujarat

Shriram Institute of Industrial Research (A unit of Shriram Scientific and Industrial Research Foundation), 19-University Road, New Delhi-110007

ii. In case, the manufacturers are exporting the Cough Syrup to USA, UK, Canada, EU, Japan, Australia, Singapore, Republic of Korea and Switzerland, the requirement of testing from the laboratories mentioned at (i) above may be waived off, in view of approval granted by these countries' regulatory agencies for plant/section engaged in manufacturing and export of Cough Syrup.

iii. Further, if Cough Syrup is manufactured in a plant/section approved by regulatory agencies for above mentioned countries at (ii) for any product, such Cough Syrup shall be permitted to be exported to any country without testing as mandated at (i) above.

(j) While streamlining of Halal Certification Process for Meat and Meat Products, new policy condition 08 under Chapter 02 and policy condition No. 02 under Chapter 16 of the Schedule II of the Export Policy are inserted against ITCHS Codes 02013000, 02023000, 02041000, 02042100, 02042200, 02042300, 02043000, 02044100,

---

02044200, 02044300, 02045000,
02061000, 02062100, 02062200,
02062900, 02068010, 02068090,
02069010, 02069090, 16021000,
16025000&16029000 as-

i. Specified Meat and meat products shall be allowed to be exported as Halal certified to the countries listed below, only if such products are produced or processed and/or packaged in a facility certified under the "India Conformity Assessment Scheme(I-CAS)-Halal" of the Quality Council of India (QCI).

ii. After the shipment(s) are made, the exporter shall provide valid Halal Certificate(s) issued under I-CAS by a Certification Body accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies (NABCB) to the buyer in the importing country listed below.

iii. In addition to the requisite conformity with I-CAS, the export of specified meat and meat products to countries wherein regulation(s) for import of Halal products are notified, the producer/supplier/exporter shall also meet the importing country's requirements and regulations, as applicable, and shall provide valid certificate(s) to the buyer in the importing country issued by Halal Certification Bodies approved under the National Halal system of the Importing Country.

iv. The Policy Conditions and Procedures thereof for the Export of Non-Halal Certified Meat and Meat products remain unchanged.

v. The List of Countries wherein the above-mentioned conditions for Export of specified Halal Meat & Meat products is mandated is as follows:
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Oman
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Turkey
United Arab Emirates

(k) Minimum Export Price of USD 2000/MT F.O.B. on Export of Honey under HS Code 04090000 has been extended till 31st December 2025.

(ii) Harmonization of 8-digit Export Policy
Export Cell, DGFT, is in the process of harmonizing the 8-digit HS Code-based Export Policy for Chapters 40-98 and syncing the already notified the 8-digit Export Policy for Chapters 1-39. It has been decided to issue a common notification to publish the 8-digit HS Code-based Export Policy in accordance with the latest ITC HS, as per the Finance Act 2024, for all Chapters (i.e., Chapters 1-98) at once. The policy is under finalization stage and will be notified soon in public interest.

(iii) Restricted Export License
The applications for issuance of export authorization for 'Restricted' items (other than SCOMET items) e.g. as Onion seeds, dried seeds, nux vomica, live animals, seaweeds, Pomfret, frozen & bovine semen, non-Bassmati Rice Paddy

---

(Husk) other than seed quality, fodder material, chemicals under Montreal Protocol, Ethyl alcohol and other spirits, denatured, of any strength, Biodiesel and mixtures thereof, not containing or containing less than 70 per cent by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals, Raw Human Hair, Silica sands and quartz sands, chrome ore, sandalwood oil and agar oil, Red Sanders wood in log form and roots exclusively of cultivation origin obtained from private land (including Pattaland), Vintage motor cars, parts and components thereof manufactured and raw human hair are processed in Export Cell and considered by an EXIM Facilitation Committee (EFC) chaired by Addl. DGFT in charge of export and comprising representatives of various Ministries and Departments. EFC meets once a month and based on NOC/comments of subject commodity Divisions of the DOC and Administrative Ministry/Department concerned, cases are decided and Restricted Export Authorisations are issued from DGFT HQ only.

During the year 2024-25 (up to 30th November 2024), 86 export authorizations were issued for export of raw human hair under ITC HS code 0501 00 10 / 0502 00 20 subject to MEP of US$ 55000/ MTs.

During the year 2024-25 (up to 30th November 2024), 184 Export authorizations were issued against restricted items.

8. MATTERS RELATED TO IMPORTS

Import Policy Division in DGFT is entrusted with the general provisions regarding imports as laid down under Chapter-2 of Foreign Trade Policy (FTP), Handbook of Procedure (HBP), Aayat Niryat Forms (ANF) and Appendices. In addition, the Division also formulate/amend/regulate the items specific import policies as laid down under the Indian Trade Classification (Harmonised System) [ITC(HS)] in consultation with the concerned administrative Ministries/Departments. It also formulates and updates provisions for facilitating import and export of items.

The Division deals with trade related certifications/mandatory compliances such as Importer Exporter Code (IEC); Registration Cum Manufacturer Certificate (RCMC); Free Sale Certificates (FSC), Registered Exporters System (REX), enlistment of Agencies for issuance of Certificate of Origin (Non-Preferential), recognition of Pre Shipment Inspection Agencies (PSIA) for import of metallic waste & scrap.

Import Policy Division also grants import authorisation for “Restricted” items; besides allocating quotas under the Preferential Tariff Rate Quota (TRQ), Most Favoured Nation (MFN) Tariff Rate Quota and Safeguard Quota.

A list of such major initiatives and non-tariff measures imposed on the recommendation(s) of the administrative Ministry(s)/Department(s), and after consultations with relevant stakeholders, on the grounds of “Principles of Restrictions” as laid down under Para 2.07 of Foreign Trade Policy 2023, are as follows:

(i) Restriction

Import policy of some of the items have been made ‘Restricted’ following the ‘Principle of restriction’ and import of these items is thereafter require an Import Authorization from DGFT. Restricted items includes Defense/Security items, New Pneumatic tyres, Live animals & birds, Mercury, waste & scrap items, Pet Coke, second hand/used goods other than capital goods, Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and parts of Cigarette lighters.

(ii) Prohibition

Import of some of the items has been ‘Prohibited’ on the grounds of Principles of restrictions laid down under the Foreign Trade Policy, for protection of human, animal or plant life and health. These items include Wildlife (animals & birds) & their products, Ozone depleting substances, Shark fins etc.

---

(iii) Import Monitoring System (IMS)
In order to assess emerging import situation and enabling concerned administrative Ministry/Department to undertake appropriate policy measures, the Government has implemented Import Monitoring System (IMS) for four items, namely, Steel, Coal, Non-ferrous Minerals, and Paper. Import is permitted for such notified items with prior automatic registration number granted through dedicated online system.

(iv) Quality Control Order (QCO)
For protection of human, animal or plant health, environment, prevention of unfair trade practices, national security etc., the Government has notified instrument of technical regulations in the form of QCOs. Presently 180 QCOs covering 756 product lines are either already implemented or in the process of implementation.

(v) Implementation of TRQ/Quota/QR
The Import Division notifies and administers quotas under Tariff Rate Quota (TRQ), Most Favoured Nation (MFN) Tariff Rate Quota, Safeguard Quota and procedure for administration of TRQ from time to time as committed in WTO and various FTA/CECA.

(vi) Free Trade Agreements (FTAs)/Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs)
The Import Division participates in the FTA negotiations to negotiate the modalities of implementation, in case of commitment in trade in goods.

(vii) Inclusion of New ITC(HS) Codes
In order to reflect changes in the global trade environment and to facilitate import/export in relevant classification, new ITC(HS) Codes have been notified and some of the codes not in use, have been deleted or merged with other codes. During the last three years (2022-2024), total 369 new HS codes including 40 HS codes in the year 2024 have been notified under ITC(HS) 2022, Schedule -I (Import Policy).

9. INITIATIVES TAKEN FOR 'EASE OF DOING BUSINESS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE'
DGFT has undertaken a series of technology-driven solutions for Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) that would give significant boost to the foreign Trade related activities of Indian enterprises and the overall "Atma Nirbhar Bharat" Abhiyan. Some of the key initiatives are:

(i) Trade Connect ePlatform
DGFT launched Trade Connect ePlatform (https://www.trade.gov.in/) on 11th September 2024, as a unified hub for international trade inquiries and information. This platform connects entrepreneurs and exporters with key government entities, including EPCs, Indian Missions abroad, DGFT offices, and EXIM Bank, facilitating efficient communication and support. It offers a wealth of resources, such as international trade data, country guides, FTAs, trade events, and eCommerce marketplace insights. Additionally, it supports education through learning materials and enables reporting of trade disputes and barriers faced in foreign markets. This initiative aims to bolster exports to US$ 2 trillion by 2030. The initiative is part of Department of Commerce's 100-day plan. Key features include:

- Trade Agreements and Tariff explorer - To understand benefits of FTAs and tariffs for Indian products
- Product Guide and Country guide - To understand top markets, certification and compliance requirements, non-tariff barriers, anti-dumping duties and connect with buyers in various markets
- Global eCommerce Guide – Information on top countries, categories and eCommerce portals in the world
- Trade Events Worldwide – Information on events in India and abroad
- Source from India – Foreign buyers can discover verified Indian exporters to source from
- Ask an Expert – Get expert assistance on trade-related queries.

---

(ii) Self-Certified eBRC Initiative

The DGFT has launched a new system for generating Electronic Bank Realisation Certificates (eBRC) that eliminates the need for paper and associated costs. Exporters can now self-certify and create eBRCs online, bypassing visits to banks and the hassle of physical documents. This system supports bulk generation via Excel and offers API access, streamlining the process significantly. The introduction of Self-Certified eBRCs has improved efficiency for Indian exporters, saving them over Rs. 125 crore annually. By minimizing paperwork, the initiative has made it more accessible for SME and E-Commerce exporters. The move towards digital documentation has expedited clearance times, increased transparency, and lowered operational costs, representing a major advancement in trade facilitation.

(iii) E-Commerce Export Hubs (ECEH)

The recent E-Commerce Export Hubs (ECEH) initiative represents a thoughtful response to the growing demands of cross-border e-commerce by providing specialized infrastructure such as warehousing, logistics support, and streamlined customs clearance. These hubs are designed to reduce the complexities and costs associated with global trade, particularly for MSMEs. ECEH offers a more accessible pathway to international markets, ensuring that Indian exporters can operate more efficiently and competitively.

Key Advantages:

• Brings stakeholders under one roof near a port/airport-based location
• Provides for predictability and shortest possible turnaround time due to:
  • Screening and custom checks at time of entry
  • Self-sealing + No custom or BCAS formalities at gateway port/airport & export order given at ECEH
  • Provision of outposts of quality and certifying agencies in ECEH
  • Easy re-import policy for E-Commerce returns or rejects
  • Provides a new architecture for “Fulfilled by e-tailer” model where warehousing is in India

(iv) Jan-Sunwai Facility

The Jan Sunwai Facility was established on 13th September 2024 to streamline communication between stakeholders and authorities on matters related to Trade and Industry. This initiative is designed to enhance transparency and operational efficiency by offering direct access to relevant officials and minimize need for in-person office visits. Key features of the facility include dedicated video conference links that allow exporters to connect with individual officers for immediate discussions and timely responses, with issues raised being consolidated for further review. Additionally, exporters can submit formal requests for on-demand video conferencing with concerned officials, who have the flexibility to share remarks, schedule or reschedule meetings, and close requests. This facility fosters a more responsive and collaborative environment for exporters.

(v) E-Certificate of Origin Platform
Electronic Platform for Preferential Certificate of Origin was made live in September 2019. In view of Covid crisis, on-boarding of the remaining trade agreements was expedited to allow electronic issuance to avoid physical movement during the lockdown. Various FTA partner countries were persuaded to accept the e-COOs. Issuances of Non-Preferential CoOs was also initiated from 15th April 2021. 122 issuing agencies, 280 specific offices and 820 issuing officers are currently on-board the given platform. Around 36 Lakh + CoOs have been issued from the e-platform till date.

(vi) 24*7 Auto-Generation of e-IEC
Importer-Exporter Code (IEC) serves as a mandatory business identification number for engaging in export-import activities in India. The IEC is applied for and automatically approved online, operating 24/7 in a rule-based environment without any manual intervention. This process includes validation with external systems through API-based message exchanges. IEC data is electronically transmitted to the Customs Port within an hour of issuance. The entire process, from indicating an intent to export or import to actual shipping under an IEC, can be completed in an electronic, paperless manner within a few hours on the same day.

(vii) Automation of FTP Processes
DGFT has achieved significant progress in automating various FTP processes based on systems-driven business rules, without any intervention of any approving officer. This includes the issuance, invalidation, revalidation, and extension of Advance Authorisations and EPCG authorisations. This automation has dramatically reduced processing times and enhanced transparency, improving resource allocation and efficiency for exporters.

(viii) Unique Document Identification Number (UDIN)
UDINs on all electronically issued documents enhance document authenticity, allowing easy verification of authenticity of documents whether presented as printouts or electronic copies.

(x) Reducing Compliance Burden Initiative
A task force was formed to identify and streamline regulatory processes. Under this initiative, 47 compliances were reduced or streamlined. Significant improvements include the online submission of applications, auto-approval systems, and efforts to minimize processing fees and documentation requirements.

(x) Electronic Origin Data Exchange System (EODES)
The Electronic Origin Data Exchange System (EODES) was implemented by the DGFT in December 2023 in coordination with the Department of Revenue (DoR). By automating data exchanges between India and Republic of Korea, EODES enhances efficiency, ensures compliance with international trade agreements, and expedites the export process for Indian businesses.

(xi) Russia-Ukraine Helpdesk
In response to geopolitical challenges, DGFT operationalized a helpdesk to support stakeholders in navigating trade-related issues arising from the Russia-Ukraine conflict.

(xii) Modernisation of DGFT IT Systems
The following improvements have been implemented recently to extend greater facilitation and ease of doing business to trade and Industry:

DGFT has launched an updated website, Mobile App and Chatbot, making DGFT related processes completely paperless, user-friendly, and easy to navigate. The new platform used the latest technology with Centralized & cloud-based Data storage, Open Framework based Development, Identity & Access Management, Dedicated Helpdesk facilities, Business Analytics & an AI driven virtual assistant. The new platform is proven to:

---

Significantly reduce the time taken for issuance of DGFT documents.
Ensure real time data interchange with sister departments in trade ecosystem.
Provides transparency to exporters/importers through real time monitoring of the status of applications.
Ensure the paperless, contactless processing of applications.

The availability of digitized trade policy, ITC (HS) based Import/Export Policy and other documents on the new platform would help trade stakeholders in cutting down the information asymmetry related issues. Also, using exporters/importers profile data, timely information related to notification, application status etc. among others would be intimated through the SMS and email communications.

All information on Foreign Trade Policy Updates, Import/Export Policy, Export/Import Statistics, status of applications, 24x7 virtual assistance is available through the DGFT Trade Facilitation App. The App was launched by Hon'ble CIM on 12th April 2021.

This new system facilitates two-way online communication & processing, e-verification of the authenticity of DGFT issued documents and authorization to provide a paperless, contactless interface between the importers/exporters and DGFT. Electronic real-time data exchange with Customs has led to the doing away with paper copy for the Export Promotion Schemes being operated by DGFT.

It provides paperless, electronic processes for managing the lifecycle of AA/EPCG/DFIA/Import/Export Licensing et al. Requirements for physical submission of any documents or any office visits under various earlier trade procedures have been done away with.

(xiii) Implementation for Internationalization of Rupee Trade

Provision of Vostro Account for realization has been enabled in DGFT online modules to promote trade settlement in Rupees. The given implementation has been made under the AA & EPCG modules.

(xiv) Promotion of Cross-Border Trade in the Digital Economy

With the evolving global trade landscape, the Directorate General of Foreign Trade has notified a regulatory framework for cross-border trade of goods and services in the digital economy, particularly to facilitate and streamline cross-border e-commerce exports.

Importance of Focus on E-Commerce Exports:

Rapid Growth in Cross-Border E-Commerce: Global cross-border e-commerce is projected to reach US$ 800 billion by 2025 and US$ 2 trillion by 2030, constituting about 6.6 per cent of total merchandise exports. This rapid expansion offers a substantial opportunity for India to tap into growing global demand.

Outpacing Global Growth: The global e-commerce market is expected to grow by 10.4 per cent in 2024, much faster than the global economy (3.1 per cent) and global retail industry (4.1 per cent). This trend underscores the potential of e-commerce to drive growth and exports.

India's Competitive Position: India ranks as the 7th largest market globally in terms of domestic e-commerce revenue, reaching US$ 87.5 billion in 2023 and exhibiting the highest growth rate (22.6 per cent) among major economies.

High SME Participation: Approximately 62 per cent of Indian SMEs use domestic e-commerce platforms, highlighting the sector's importance for small businesses and the potential to expand their reach to international markets.

Strength in Top-Selling Categories: India has significant strengths in many of the top-selling categories in cross-border e-commerce, making it well-positioned to expand its market share in global e-commerce.

Key Initiatives

Export Benefits for E-Commerce: Extending export incentives such as RoDTEP (Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products), RoSCTL (Rebate of State and Central Levies and Taxes), and the Drawback Scheme to exports made via courier, boosting the e-commerce sector and streamlining trade processes.

**Courier and Postal Exports:** Facilitating exports up to Rs. 10,00,000 per consignment through registered courier services and Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras. These centres operate in a hub-and-spoke model with Foreign Post Offices (FPOs) to support artisans, weavers, craftsmens, and MSMEs in remote regions, allowing them to reach international markets efficiently.

**Outreach and Capacity Building for cross-border e-commerce:** DGFT, in partnership with Customs Authorities, the Department of Post, industry, and knowledge partners, is conducting outreach activities, workshops, and skill development programs to promote e-commerce exports. A special focus is placed on creating electronic content and increasing awareness of e-commerce rules and processes for exporters.

**E-Commerce Export Hubs (ECHEs):**
Designated warehousing and fulfillment hubs shall provide MSMEs and artisans with centralized infrastructure for cross-border e-commerce, offering streamlined regulatory and logistics frameworks. The hubs should enable exporters to warehouse goods and ensure expedited delivery to international markets. Pilot launch of ECEH has been initiated in consultation with Department of Revenue (CBIC), Ministry of Civil Aviation (BCAS) and various industry stakeholders.

This structured focus on promoting e-commerce exports aligns with India's broader strategy to boost exports, capitalize on emerging digital trade channels, and establish a strong presence in the fast-growing global e-commerce market.

10. OTHER SCHEMES

(A) **Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES)**

The Government of India is implementing a scheme Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES) w.e.f. FY 2017-18 with the objective to assist Central and State Government Agencies for creation of appropriate infrastructure for growth of exports from the States. The Scheme provides financial assistance in the form of grant-in-aid to Central/State Government owned agencies for setting up or for up-gradation of export infrastructure as per the guidelines of the Scheme. The Central Government assistance for infrastructure creation is in the form of grant-in-aid, normally not more than the equity being put in by the implementing agency or 50 per cent of the total equity in the project (in case of projects located in NE States and Himalayan States including Jammu & Kashmir this grant can be upto 80 per cent of the total equity). In addition, the States with relative poor export infrastructure, lacking institutional capacity for preparing good DPRs but have positive export potential, this grant can be upto 80 per cent of the total equity. The grant-in-aid is subject to a ceiling of Rs 20 crore, normally, for each project. The Scheme has been extended for 15th Finance Commission Period i.e. FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26 with total outlay of Rs. 360 crore.

During FY 2024-25, one meeting of the Empowered Committee on TIES has been held on 27.08.2024.

A total of 66 projects have been sanctioned under TIES and are located in Assam, Tamil Nadu, Chandigarh, Rajasthan, Manipur, Delhi, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tripura, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, Jharkhand, Punjab, Haryana, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Bhilar. Of these 66 projects, 28 projects are completed.

(B) **Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme**

The Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme plays a catalytic role to promote exports of Indian goods and services by providing financial support to eligible agencies such as Export Promotion Councils, Apex Trade Bodies, etc., to undertake necessary initiatives and projects towards exploring new markets and consolidating the existing markets for Indian exports. The activities supported under the MAI Scheme include training in exports, market research, capacity building, branding, meeting statutory regulations in import markets, etc., apart from participation in fairs and exhibitions. The normal sharing pattern is 65 per cent: 35 per cent, i.e. 65 per cent of the expenditure is covered by the Government grant and 35 per cent by the industry contribution. In the case of priority sectors, the share is in the ratio of 90:10 between the Government and the industry contribution. The priority sectors are agri and food products, handcraft, handlooms, GI Products, carpets, leather, sports goods & toys, silk, wool, jute and minor forest produce. Further, participation of exporters from North Eastern Region, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh and hill areas, exporters belonging to SC/ST and women exporters would also be eligible for assistance in the priority sector funding.

MAI Scheme, 2021: The Government has approved continuation of the Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme in a revised form, with an outlay of Rs.1000 crore over the period of five years beyond 31st March 2021, i.e. up to 31st March 2026.

Salient features of the MAI Scheme, 2021:
Focus has been brought on capacity building of exporters on standards and regulations, export packaging, export-oriented skill development and also development of districts as export hub.
Focus has also been brought on promotion of traditional Indian products and services like AYUSH, Yoga, GI products, crafts and artisanal products including toys, tribal products, etc; promotion of e-Business tools, communication technology, etc.
Priority sector status has been given to employment generating agri-based sectors of wool, silk and Gl, in addition to the existing handicrafts, handlooms, carpets, leather, toys, sports goods, minor forest produce including jute, agricultural including food items.
Exporters from North Eastern Region (NER), Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh and hill regions and people belonging to the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe and women exporters would be eligible for priority sector funding and they would also be given preference in the activities under the Scheme.

To deal with pandemic situations like COVID-19, digital/hybrid export promotion activities have been included in addition to the activities/events in physical settings.

In order to ensure that the benefits of the Scheme reach a larger number of exporters, a maximum of three participations in a particular trade fair/exhibition would only be eligible for MAI assistance, i.e., members who have availed assistance three times (including past cases) for a particular fair/exhibition, thereafter have to participate in that fair on their own.
In the case of exporters belonging to SC/ST/Women and the exporters having f.o.b. value of exports of or less than Rs. 50 crore in a year, 5 participations in a particular event is allowed.

Smaller exporters get the expenses on airfare for participating in approved export promotion activities abroad reimbursed.

On sharing basis and subject to ceiling, expenditure incurred by exporters on statutory compliances abroad (such as registration charges paid in case of pharmaceuticals, bio-technology, chemicals/agro-chemicals, agricultural/animal/marine products, food products; testing charges of engineering products, which require mandatory testing abroad for exports, etc.) is provided to the exporters through the EPC concerned.

Restriction on hosting of foreign buyers from the developed countries/markets in the Reverse Buyer-Seller Meets organized in India has been removed.

Assistance of Rs. 210.92 crore have been approved under the Market Access Initiative Scheme for 244 proposals from the Export Promotion Councils and Trade Bodies etc. for undertaking export promotion activities in physical mode during FY 2024-25.

Budgetary allocation made for the Market Access Initiative Scheme during the last three years and utilisation made under the Scheme are as under.

---

(Values in Rs. crore)

Year BE provision RE provision Actual Expenditure

2021-22 200.00 140.00 140.00
2022-23 200.00 190.00 190.00
2023-24 200.00 250.00 250.00
2024-25 200.00 - 174.56 (as on 31th December 2024)

(C) Champion Services Sector Scheme (CSSS)
The Champion Services Sector Scheme (CSSS) was approved by the Government of India on 28th February 2018 to give focussed attention to 12 services sectors. These services are namely Information Technology & Information Technology enabled Services (IT& ITeS), Tourism & Hospitality Services, Medical Value Travel, Transport and Logistics Services, Accounting and Finance Services, Audio Visual Services, Legal Services, Communication Services, Construction and related Engineering Services, Environmental Services, Financial Services, and Education Services.

Services sector contributes significantly to India's GDP, FDI inflows, exports as well as job creation. The Government of India had approved creation of an earmarked fund of Rs. 5000 crore under Scheme during 2019-20 to 2023-24 to support sectoral initiatives of the nodal Ministries/Departments identified for the champion sectors in services. The main objectives of the Scheme were sectoral and cross-cutting issues including domestic regulatory reforms, new initiatives, new infrastructure and new skills. Some of the initiatives /programmes that were carried out by various Ministries/Departments under CSSS are Department of Telecommunication – Setting up of Digital Communications Innovation Square and Brand Building of India as Telecom Manufacturing and Services Destination; Ministry of Ayush - Skill development in Ayush Sector and Establishment of Ayush Grid; Ministry of Tourism - Extending Incentives for improving Air Connectivity; MeitY - Next Generation Incubation Services; M/o Information & Broadcasting - Promotion of Shooting of Foreign Films in India, etc. This Scheme has since been concluded on 31th July 2024.

---

5
Chapter

EXPORT PROMOTION
MECHANISM

68
Department of Commerce

---

Annual Report 2024-25

1. EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCILS (EPCs)
The Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) are organisations of exporters, registered as non-profit organizations under the Companies Act 2013/Societies Registration Act 1860. Roles and functions of these Councils are guided by the Foreign Trade Policy, which also recognizes them as registering authorities for exporters. At present, there are thirteen Export Promotion Councils (EPCs). The details of various EPCs are as follows:

(A) Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council (GJEPC)
The Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council (GJEPC) is an EPC established in 1966 by the Government of India to promote the country's Gem and Jewellery industry. It is headquartered in Mumbai and has around 10,000 members. GJEPC organizes Reverse Buyer Seller Meets (RBSMs) and participates in international events/exhibitions to showcase industry innovations and export promotion. It is also running training institutes like Indian Institute of Gems and Jewellery (IIGJ) at locations like Delhi, Mumbai and Jaipur etc.

Trade promotion activities undertaken by GJEPC during 2024-25:

Domestic Events
International Gems and Jewellery Show (IGJS) Jaipur 2024: 12th-14th April 2024
India International Jewellery Show (IIJS) Premiere: 8th-12th August 2024 (at Jio World Convention Centre–Mumbai) and 9th-13th August 2024 in Mumbai
2nd Edition of LGD BSM in Surat: 16th-17th April 2024

Hon'ble Union Minister Shri Pyush Goyal at the IUJS Premiere 2024 in Mumbai

Participation in International Shows/Activities
JCK Las Vegas 2024: 31st May to 3rd June 2024, Las Vegas, USA
India Pavilion at Jewellery and Gem Asia Hong Kong 2024: 20th-23rd June 2024
Vicenza Oro Fall 2024: 6th-10th September 2024, Italy

India Pavilion at Jewellery & Gem World Hong Kong 2024: 16th-20th September 2024
International Gems and Jewellery Show (IGJS) Dubai 2024: 8th-10th October 2024
Watch and Jewellery Middle East Show 2024: 25th-29th September 2024, Sharjah, UAE

Department of Commerce

---

(B) Council for Leather Exports (CLE)
CLE's Export Promotion Events (MAI & Self-financing for FY 2024-25 (April-March)

S.No. Event and Dates No. of participants Scheme
1 Africa International Footwear & Leather Products Exhibition, Nairobi, Kenya, 29th-31th May 2024 33 MAIS
2 Visit of Footwear and Leather Industry Delegation to Guangzhou, China, 29th-31th May 2024 18 Self-financing
3 8th International Bangladesh Leather & Footwear Expo, 6th-8th June 2024 02 Self-financing
4 Global Sourcing Expo, Sydney, Australia, 12th-14th June 2024 04 Self-financing
5 Expo Riva Schuh Garda Fair, Italy, 15th-18th June 2024 46 MAIS
6 Visit of Footwear and Leather Industry Delegation to HCMC, Vietnam, 8th-12th July 2024 35 Self-financing
7 Shoes & Leather Fair, HCMC, Vietnam 10th-12th July 2024 14 MAIS
8 Sourcing at Magic, Las Vegas, USA (Jointly with EPCH), 19th-21st August 2024 10 MAIS
9 Euro Shoe by CPM Moscow, Russia, 26th-29th August 2024 11 Self-financing
10 Visit of Footwear and Leather Industry Delegation to Moscow, Russia, 26th-29th August 2024 22 Self-financing
11 MIPEL – The Bag Show, Milan, Italy, 15th-17th September 2024 04 Self-financing
12 Lineapelle Fair, Italy, 17th-19th September 2024 02 Self-financing
13 Fashion World Tokyo Fair, Japan, 15th-17th October 2024 14 MAIS
14 Visit of Footwear and Leather Industry Delegation to Tokyo, Japan, 15th-17th October 2024 12 Self-financing
15 BZB event for the Indian Footwear Component Manufacturers with the Global Footwear and Apparel brands in Guangzhou, China, 22nd October 2024 13 Self-financing
16 Leather tech Bangladesh, 21th-23rd November 2024 05 Self-financing
17 Footwear & Leather Show, Melbourne, Australia, 19th-21st November 2024 02 Self-financing
18 Dubai International Footwear and Leather Exhibition, 10th-12th December 2024 40* MAIS
19 Expo Riva Schuh Fair Garda, Italy, 11th-14th January 2025 35* Self-financing
20 Designer Fair, Chennai, 11th-13th February 2025 35* MAIS
21 Sourcing at Magic, Las Vegas, USA, 10th-12th February 2025 5* Self-financing
22 DILEX – Reverse BSM, New Delhi, 20th-21st February 2025 200 exhibitors* 225 overseas buyers*
23 APLF, Hong Kong, 12th-14th March 2025 42* MAIS
24 Fashion Access Fair, Hong Kong, 12th-14th March 2025 15* Self-financing
25 India Footwear & leather Product Show, Saudi Arabia, March 2025 25* Self-financing

*Expected No. of participants

---

Webinars organized by CLE during 2024-25
following six webinars for the benefit of members.

During April-October 2024, CLE organized the

1 Radio Frequency Dryer application in leather skin drying 18th April 2024
2 Schemes/support measures of SIDBI 14th May 2024
3 Cross-Border Payment Mechanisms 6th June 2024
4 Export Credits and other facilities and recent GST changes 18th July 2024
5 EU Deforestation Regulation (EUDR) 4th October 2024
6 Services of SBER Bank 25th October 2024

(C) Basic Chemicals, Cosmetics & Dyes Export Promotion Council (CHEMEXCIL)
Basic Chemicals, Cosmetics & Dyes Export Promotion Council, popularly known as CHEMEXCIL was constituted in 1963 under Companies Act 1956 in Mumbai with the objective of promoting export of Dyes and Dye Intermediates, Basic Inorganic, Organic Chemicals including Agro Chemicals, Cosmetics,

Soaps, Detergents, Toiletries & Essential Oils, Speciality Chemicals, Lubricants and Castor Oil. The Council's head office is located in Mumbai and it has four Regional Offices at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Kolkata and New Delhi.

During April-November 2024 CHEMEXCIL organized following export promotional events/activities:

S. No. International Events
1 The 23rd China International Dye Industry, Pigments and Textile Chemicals Exhibition (CHINA INTERDYE 2024) at Shanghai, China, 17th-19th April 2024
2 Coating Expo Vietnam 2024 in conjunction with Color & Spechem Vietnam and Agri Vietnam 2024, 12th-14th June 2024
3 CHEMSPEC EUROPE 2024 (The 37th International Exhibition for Fine and Speciality Chemicals), 19th-20th June 2024
4 India Pavilion at BEAUTY ISTANBUL 2024 from 2nd-4th October 2024 -Istanbul, Turkey
5 India Pavilion at KHIMIA 2024 Expocentre Fairgrounds, Moscow, Russia 21st-24th October 2024

Export Promotional Activities
S. No. Date Topic
1 2nd April 2024 Webinar on current legal framework for doing business in Russia
2 16th April 2024 Webinars on various DC (MSME) schemes
3 18th April 2024 Webinars on Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) and Custom Faceless Assessment
4 30th April 2024 Webinars on ZED certification
5 2nd May 2024 Seminar cum workshop on growing opportunities From Free Trade Agreements - An Industry Perspective
6 3rd May 2024 Webinar on Doing Business with China
7 10th May 2024 Webinar on Doing Business with Africa
8 17th May 2024 Webinar on Doing Business with Vietnam, Indonesia & Singapore
9 28th May 2024 Webinar on How to identify and manage geopolitical risk
10 12th June 2024 Virtual B-2-B meeting Indian exporters and Angola importers

---

S. No. Date Topic

11 25th June 2024 Webinar on global economic outlook and hedging solutions for managing risk in association with SBI bank

12 12th July 2024 Seminar on workshop on CHEMEXCIL membership awareness, export incentives, logistics, and procedures on 12th July 2024

13 16th July 2024 Webinar on U.S. Federal Contracting

14 25th July 2024 Webinars on K-Reach Regulations

15 26th July 2024 Webinar on post-budget analysis of impact of Union Budget 2024 on export/import

16 31th July 2024 Webinar on Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and regulatory implications

17 20th August 2024 Webinar on EU's carbon border adjustment mechanism (CBAM) - opportunities and risks for the Indian chemicals industry

19 28th August 2024 Webinars on K-reach regulations

20 3rd September 2024 Webinar on Macro understanding new US FDA cosmetic regulations

21 4th September 2024 Webinar on EU's upcoming regulation eco-design for sustainable products regulations (ESPR)

22 26th September 2024 Dual seminar sessions on:
• Breaking the chains of fear-transform safety into profit
• Online compliances for exporters with specific details on EBRC module

23 28th October 2024 Physical Seminar on EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) & Quality Control Orders (QCOs) at The Orchid Hotel, Mumbai

24 12th November 2024 Workshop on FTA Fundamentals: Equipping MSMEs for Internationalization" at Fairfield by Marriott, Vadodara, Gujarat, India.

(D) Plastics Export Promotion Council (PLEXCONCIL)
The Plastics Export Promotion Council (PLEXCONCIL) was established in 1955 and registered under section 25 of Companies Act 1956, with the aim of promoting the exports of Plastics & Linoleum products from India and represents over 3,000 exporters primarily MSMEs who manufacture/trade in plastics products ranging from plastics raw materials to semi-finished and finished items. PLEXCONCIL maintains five offices across India-Mumbai (Head office) and regional offices at Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata and Ahmedabad.

The Council is presently entrusted with the export promotion activities of the product panels are Consumer & house ware products, Cordage, fishnets & monofilaments, FIBC, Woven sacks, Woven fabrics, Tarpaulin, Floor coverings, leather cloth & laminates,

FRP & Composites, Human hair & related products, Medical items of plastics, Miscellaneous products and items, Packaging items - flexible, rigid, Plastic films and sheets, Plastic pipes & fittings, Plastic raw materials, Writing instruments & stationery and Merchant Exports.

During April-November 2024 PLEXCONCIL organized the following export promotional events/activities:

S. No. International Events
1 CHINAPLAS 2024, 23rd-25th April 2024
2 NPE - 2024 from 6th-10th May 2024
3 Complast Nepal, 28th-30th November 2024

S. No. Domestic Event
1 Reverse Buyer Seller Meet cum Exhibition in PLEXCONNECT-2024 India from 7th-9th June 2024

---

Annual Report 2024-25

Export Promotional Activities

S. No. Date Topic
1 12th April 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly in collaboration with DGFT RA – Nagpur, MSME, E-Commerce & DIC, organized a Seminar on "Export Awareness and Plexconnect 2024 Roadshow", Nagpur Maharashtra
2 12th April 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly in collaboration with the IPF, organized a Seminar on "Export Awareness and the Plexconnect 2024 Roadshow", in Kolkata
3 15th April 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly in collaboration with the FIEO (Odisha Chapter) and DEP&M (MSME Department, Government of Odisha), organized a "Seminar on Export Awareness on Plastics and the Plexconnect 2024 Roadshow", in Ahmedabad, Gujarat
4 19th April 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly in collaboration with the Gujarat State Plastics Manufacturers Association (GSPMA), organized a "Seminar on Export Awareness on Plastics and the Plexconnect 2024 Roadshow", in Ahmedabad, Gujarat
5 20th April 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly in collaboration with the Tamil Nadu Plastics Manufacturers' Association (TAPMA) organized a "Seminar on Export Awareness on Plastics and the Plexconnect 2024 Roadshow", in Chennai
6 30th April 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly in collaboration with the Plastic Cluster, Sambhaji Nagar, organized a "Seminar on Export Awareness on Plastics and the Plexconnect 2024 Roadshow", in Aurangabad, Maharashtra"
7 23rd April 2024 PLEXCONCIL organized a "Webinar for International Buyers- To learn about PLEXCONNECT-2024 & International Buyer Registration"
8 6th May 2024 PLEXCONCIL organized a "Webinar on Export Opportunities on Plastics and for Plexconnect 2024"
9 15th May 2024 PLEXCONCIL jointly with North Orissa Chamber of Commerce & Industry (NOCCI) organized Export Awareness Seminar on Plastics and PLEXCONNECT 2024 Roadshow at Balasore, Odisha
10 8th June 2024 PLEXCONCIL organized a one-day Seminar during PLEXCONNECT- 2024, in Mumbai, in which the following session was conducted
Session on "Creating New Markets for Indian Exports - The Role for Trade Finance & Credit Insurance"
Session on "Reverse Engineering for Import substitution plastic products"
Session on "Requirements for Green Buildings - Moving towards (Net Zero) Energy Waste, Water and Carbon"
Session on "Food contact regulations on Plastics Material"
Session on "Automobiles – The Future is Plastics"
11 23rd August 2024 PLEXCONCIL organized a Webinar on the "Importance of Trade Credit Insurance"
12 27th August 2024 PLEXCONCIL organized a Webinar on "Export Awareness Sessions and Updates on GST and Credit Finance"
13 25th October 2024 PLEXCONCIL in association with Lakshmi Kumaran & Sridharan Attorneys (L&S) organized a webinar onLatest Amendments under GST/FTP in relation to Exports.
14 21st-24th November 2024 PLEXCONCIL participated at the Odisha Plast International Expo 2024 (21st to 24th November 2024) held at Janata Maidan, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
15 27th November 2024 The Embassy of India in Guatemala, in collaboration with PLEXCONCIL, successfully hosted a Virtual Buyer-Seller Meet connecting over 35 companies from Guatemala and 20 from India

---

Annual Report 2024-25

S. No.
Date
Topic
16
29th November 2024
PLEXCONCIL in co-operation with Finrex Treasury Advisors LLP, conducted a training session on "Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), PCFC & Essential Documentation for Export/Import"

(E) Chemicals & Allied products Export Promotion Council (CAPEXIL)
Chemicals & Allied products Export Promotion Council (CAPEXIL), a premier Export Promotion Council, was set up in 1958 under the Companies Act, 1956. The Council's registered office and head office is located in Kolkata and it has four regional offices located at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and New Delhi.
The Council is entrusted with the export promotion activities of chemical based allied products which includes Bulk Minerals and Ores, Natural Stone Products, Processed Minerals, Paper & Paper Board Products, Auto Tyre and Tubes, Rubber 14 Products, Ceramics and Allied Products, Glass and Glassware, Plywood and Allied Products, Cement, Clinkers and Asbestos products, Graphite and explosives, Books, Publications & Printing products, Paints, Printing Ink and Allied Products, Miscellaneous Chemical Products, Ossin and Gelatin and Animal by-products.

During April-November 2024 CAPEXIL organized following export promotional events/activities:

S. No.
International Events
1
COVERINGS 2024 Exhibition, at Georgia World Congress Centre, Atlanta, Georgia, USA during April 22nd-25th April 2024
2
33rd Abu Dhabi International Book Fair from 29th April 2024 to 5th May 2024
3
Paper One Show, Dubai for Packaging Products during 16th-18th April 2024
4
FRANKFURT Book Fair, Frankfurt, Book and Publication products during 16th-20th October 2024

Export Promotional Activities

S. No.
Date
Topic
1
16th April 2024
CAPEXIL conducted Webinar Programme on Marine Insurance & Forex Facilities in association with "M/s. National Insurance Company Ltd., Chennai and also with Punjab National Bank, Chennai", through virtual mode
2
23rd-24th April 24
CAPEXIL organized Awareness Program (Virtual) regarding US ITC has initiated anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations on Imports of Ceramic Tiles from India
3
16th May 2024
CAPEXIL organized Webinar Programme with O/o Zonal Additional D.G.F.T., Chennai and also with O/o Principal Commissioner of Customs (Air cargo), Chennai", through virtual mode
4
12th June 2024
CAPEXIL organized Virtual B2B Meeting between Indian Exporters and Dominican companies dealing in Ceramics and Sanitary ware products
5
13th June 2024
CAPEXIL conducted Webinar Programme with "Office of Chennai Port Trust, Chennai and also with M/s. Container Corporation of India Ltd., Chennai", through virtual mode
6
26th June 2024
Organized Virtual Meetings between Indian Exporters of Ceramic Tiles & two separate Consultancy firms regarding the Initiation of Extension of Safeguard Measures on Ceramic flags and paving, hearth or wall tiles 690721, 690722 & 690723 by Indonesia

---

Annual Report 2024-25

S. No. Date Topic
7 27th June 2024 CAPEXIL Conducted Webinar Programme with State Bank of India, Chennai and also with M/s, ECGC Ltd., Chennai, through virtual mode
8 2nd July 2024 CAPEXIL organized Panel Meeting of the Ceramics & Allied Products including Refractories Panel through virtual mode
9 8th July 2024 CAPEXIL organized Interactive Meeting (virtual) USDOC CVD investigation on Ceramic Tiles from India (C-533-929) organized by Trade Defence Wing, Directorate General of Trade Remedies, Department of Commerce, Government of India
10 16th July 2024 CAPEXIL conducted webinar on "Use of Artificial Intelligence in International Business" at Chennai in association with "Department of Management Studies, IIT, Chennai & MSME Department of Tamil Nadu (FaMe TN) Chennai
11 16th July 2024 CAPEXIL organized Interactive Session (virtual) with the Senior Officials of Embassy of India, Brazil on to explore the possibilities of various trade promotional activities including Trade Delegation to Brazil for Exhibition cum BSM as per advice of the Indian Mission as well as to organize more & more Virtual B2B Meets in coming months
12 23rdJuly 2024 CAPEXIL in association with Handicraft Export Promotion Council organised Interactive Meeting with all concerned stakeholders
13 26th July 2024 CAPEXIL organized Interactive Session cum Export Awareness Webinar for the MSME Member Exporters
14 30th July 2024 CAPEXIL organised Webinar Programme on "Accreditation: Assuring Quality, Regulatory Compliance & Facilitating Trade" in association with "Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IFT), Kolkata and National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies, Quality Council of India (NABCB), New Delhi"
15 12th August 2024 CAPEXIL organized Virtual Buyer Seller Meet for the Indian Ceramic Industry with the Mexican Buyers in association with the Embassy of India Mexico City, Mexico and Morbi Ceramic Manufacturer Association
16 14th August 2024 CAPEXIL organized a Webinar with "Foreign Post, Chennai and also with Small Industries Development Bank of India, Chennai", through virtual mode
17 6th September 2024 CAPEXIL participated in Pre-Launch Event of Vibrant Buildcon Expo at Morbi, Gujarat
18 11th September 2024 CAPEXIL organized Stakeholders Consultation Meeting with Pet food exporters on virtual mode
19 18th September 2024 CAPEXIL organised the Miscellaneous Panel Meeting at Sivakasi
20 29th October 2024 CAPEXIL conducted Webinar Programme with "Export Inspection Agency, Chennai and also with MSME Development & Facilliation Office, Chennai".
21 7th November 2024 CAPEXIL attended the interactive session organized by FIEO with the support of Embassy of Brazil in New Delhi
22 14th November 2024 CAPEXIL attended the meeting with Missions of North East Asia countries, China, Japan and Korea, under DoC
23 15th November 2024 CAPEXIL organized 2nd Ceramic Panel meeting (Virtual) to discuss and consider ceramic panel related issues for the financial year 2024-25
24 15th November 2024 CAPEXIL organized Webinar programme with "Director General of Commercial Intelligence & Statistics, Kolkata and also with Exim Bank of India, Chennai

---

Annual Report 2024-25

S. No. Date Topic
25 18th November 2024 CAPEXIL organized Ossein & Gelatin Panel meeting virtually
26 18th November 2024 CAPEXIL attended meeting for International Trade & Logistics Sectoral Committee for BGBS at, WBIDC, Kolkata
27 28th November 2024 CAPEXIL attended meeting with member exports of Ceramic Panel for Vibrant Buildcon Event to be held from 13th to 16th April 2025

(F) Shellac and Forest Products Export Promotion Council (SHEFEXIL)
The Shellac Export Promotion Council was founded in June 1957, under the Companies Act, 1956, which was re-christened to Shellac and Forest Products Export Promotion Council (SHEFEXIL) on 8th February 2007. The Council's registered office is located at Kolkata and has no additional branch or regional office.
SHEFEXIL is the designated nodal agency for export promotion of key products, like Nutraceuticals, Extracts/Botanicals, Herbs, Guar Gum, Shellac & Lac based products. SHEFEXIL is mandated for export promotion of 8 unique panels which are Nutraceuticals, Vegetable Saps & Extracts, Plant and Plant Portions (Herbs), Guar Gum, Shellac & Lac based products, Other Vegetable materials, Fixed Vegetable Oils, Cakes& Others and North East Region.

During April-November 2024 SHEFEXIL organized following export promotional events/activities:

S. No. International Events
1 Vitafoods Europe 2024 Europe Switzerland 14th-16th May 2024
2 Food Ingredients Europe 2024, Frankfurt, Germany, 19th-21st November 2024

Export Promotional Activities
S. No. Date Topic
1. 14th August 2024 SHEFEXIL conducted Workshop on Lac Cultivation and Export at Niyojan Bhavan, Collector Office in Chandrapur by DGFT RA Nagpur in coordination with TFRI, SHEFEXIL and Department of Forest, Maharashtra.
2. 20th-24th September 2024 SHEFEXIL participated in Bengal Shopping Festival Expo, held in Kolkata to promote marginal farmers of Betel Leaves.

(G) Sports Goods Export Promotion Council (SGEPC)
The SGEPC has conducted the following trade promotion and related activities during the financial year 2024-25 under MAI scheme:
The SGEPC has conducted the following trade

S. No. Event Name Region Country Commodity Name Event Start Date Event End Date
1 SGEPC India RBSM for Toys 2024 Mumbai India Toys 12th September 2024 14th September 2024
2 Tagxpo 2024 – Toys & Games Expo Africa Kenya Toys 16th May 2024 18th May 2024
3 Autumn Fair Birmingham 2024 Europe United Kingdom Toys & Sports Goods 1st September 2024 4th September 2024
4 ISPO 2024 Europe Germany Sports Goods 3rd December 2024 5th December 2024
5 Hong Kong Toys & Games Fair 2025 NEA Hong Kong Toys 6th January 2025 9th January 2025

---

S.
No Event Name Region Country Commodity Name Event Start Date Event End Date
6 Spielwarenmesse International Toy Fair 2025 Europe Germany Toys 28th January 2025 1st February 2025
7 New York Toy Fair 2024 NAFTA United States Toys 1st March 2025 4th March 2025
8 SGEPC India RBSM for Sports Goods 2025 New Delhi, India Sports Goods 24th March 2025 25th March 2025

(H) Project Exports Promotion Council of India (PEPC)

Project Exports Promotion Council of India (PEPC), an export promotion council set up by the Government, is an apex coordinating agency to facilitate project exports comprising of overseas projects contracted in any of the following modules:

Civil Construction Projects
Turnkey Projects: including engineering, procurement and construction (from concept to commissioning) and essentially includes civil work/construction and all supplies specific to these turnkey projects
Process and Engineering Consultancy Services and
Project construction items (excluding Steel and Cement):
Construction Engineering Products (Fittings & Fixtures/Materials)
Construction Equipment's & Accessories
Other Project Goods
PEPC is an Autonomous Society under Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

(i) Sectors of Development
PEPC, has been actively engaged in the development and promotion of project exports in major sectors of economic and industrial development such as construction of dams, hydroelectric & thermal power plants, industrial plants, utility buildings, large scale oil and natural gas pipelines, petrochemical refineries and complexes, motorways, tunnels and bridges, seaports and airports, large-scale housing projects, high-rise buildings, hotels & tourist resorts etc.

(ii) Markets
The major markets for the Indian process and construction engineering contractors and consultants have been:
Asia
Africa
Middle East
North America

(iii) Export Performance
Total value secured
Years 2023-24 (FY 2023-24) 2024-25 (till October 2024)
Values in Rs. crore 1,45,299.24 64,125.04
Values in US$ million 37,044.39 7,644.17

The contracts were secured in Power transmission & Distribution, Solar, Hydrocarbons, IT Infrastructure & Industrial Plant Project sectors.

The range of value of contracts secured is US$ 0.01 million (Manual Drilling Tool) to US$ 1,498.80 million (build two-Gigawatt scale Solar PV plants).

The contract basket is fairly spread in various countries with contracts being secured in Bangladesh, Australia, United Arab Emirates, America, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Vietnam, Pennsylvania, Mexico, Canada, Scotland, Germany, France and Kenya during FY 2024-25.

The contracts in FY 2024-25 have been secured primarily in PT&D (Power Transmission & Distribution) & Industrial projects sectors. This reflects the technical & financial maturity of Indian Project Exporters in these sectors.

---

(I) Telecom Equipment and Services Export Promotion Council (TEPC)

Telecom Equipment and Services Export Promotion Council (TEPC) has been set up by the Government of India to promote and develop export of telecom equipment and services from India.

TEPC as a Council plays a critical role in furtherance of Telecom export from the India and assists its member companies in easy facilitation of their respective exports. The Council caters to the complete Telecom Ecosystem including Telecom Hardware Manufacturers, Telecom Service Providers, Telecom Software Vendors and Consultants. Export promotion continues to be a major thrust area for the Government. In a view of the prevailing macro-economic situation, Government emphasis is on exports promotion activities and to facilitate it, various measures are being undertaken through Market Access Initiative Schemes from the Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry India to support the various export.

TEPC has been working with the entire eco-system of Indian telecom exporters as well as various departments of Government of India to deliver and create end-to-end telecom solutions. Keeping in mind the caliber of Indian Manufactures and demand of developing countries, TEPC felicitates various projects in the field of Telecom Digital connectivity. TEPC has invited its members for consortium approach to provide a platform to perform and deliver their respective services to clients outside India. It will also help in sharing the individual expertise of the members and promote the Telecom equipment & services from India to the developing world.

Vision

- TEPC shall continue to promote telecom exports from India
- Promote and accentuate Telecom Exports from India.
- Create a healthy environment for growth of Telecom Ecosystem including manufacturing & Services Sector in India.
- Encourage both private and overseas Investments in India under Foreign Direct Investment.

Encourage Strategic Alliances, MOUs, and technical/Financial collaborations to boost trade.
Support local IPRs & R&D activities for Design in India and making of World Class telecom products.

(J) Electronics and Computer Software Export Promotion Council

Electronics and Computer Software Export Promotion Council (ESC) is India's apex trade promotion organization which was incepted in 1989. The Government of India has entrusted upon ESC to promote India's exports of Electronics, Telecom, Computer Software and IT Enabled Services.

Over the years ESC has built a strong membership base of over 2500 manufacturers and exporters from across the length and breadth of the country covering a wide gamut of Electronics and Software Industry:

Consumer Electronics

- Electronic Components
- Instrumentation
- Telecommunication
- Computer Hardware and Peripherals
- Computer Software and IT Enabled Services

ESC has taken numerous initiatives to accelerate the export of Electronics and Software from India like:

- Provides commercially useful information and assistance to their members in developing and increasing their exports
- Undertakes Market Research/Studies and publicity Campaigns in overseas markets
- ESC facilitates business interface between Indian and foreign companies through:
  - Participation in Globally renowned Tradeshows/Expositions
  - Buyers-Seller Meets
  - Reverse Buyer Seller Meets
  - Conferences/Congress

---

Match-making and Contact Promotion
Act as a link between the Government and member exporters in resolving various policy issues
Maintains India's export figures for the sectors of electronics, Computer software/Services and ITEs. ESC publishes an annual statistical year book having detailed analysis of India's export performance

During the year 2024-25, India exported Electronics to a tune of US$ 19.07 billion (April-October 2024) and software export is estimated to have reached to a level of US$ 121.75 billion.

International Engagements

InnoEX 2024 (13th-16th April 2024)
Electronics and Computer Software Export Promotion Council participated in CES 2024 edition from 13th-16th April 2024 with a delegation of 19 comprising of Electronics and Software companies. The delegation got an overwhelming response during the show.

Electrical Wire Processing Technology Expo 2024 (14th-16th May 2024)
ESC organized 14 member companies participation at Electrical Wire Processing Technology Expo (EWPTE) held in Baird Centre, Milwaukee, WI, USA from 14th-16th May 2024. EWPTE attended more than 3,000 visitors, 200 exhibitors & participation from 25 countries. The show provided the opportunity to network with industry leaders, end user decision makers in the Cable & Wire Harness sector. The India pavilion was inaugurated by Shri T. D. Bhutia, Deputy Consul General of India, Chicago.

IoT Solutions World Congress (21th-23rd May 2024)
ESC organized 14 member companies participation at IOT SOLUTIONS WORLD CONGRESS held in Barcelona, Spain. The India Pavilion was inaugurated by Shri Dinesh Patnaik, Ambassador of India, Spain.

GITEX Africa (29th-31st May 2024)
Electronics and Computer Software Export Promotion Council organized a participation of 24 Electronics and IT companies to GITEX Africa, Morocco from 29th-31st May 2024. The meet was addressed by Shri Rajesh Valshaw, Ambassador of India, Morocco. The Indian participants got an overwhelming response during the show.

ELECCOMP (29th June-2nd July 2024)
The Council organized a delegation visit to Tehran, Iran from 28th June-1st July 2024, coinciding with the 27th edition of Eleccomp 2024 – Iran’s Premier Electronics and Computer Software Trade Exhibition.

GITEX DUBAI (14th-18th October 2024)
The Council organized the largest ever Indian participation at GITEX Dubai. The India Pavilion was inaugurated by Indian Ambassador UAE Shri Sunjay Sudhir Shri Consul General of India to Dubai, Shri Satish Kumar Sivan also was present. 100 Indian ICT companies are displaying their products and solutions at the GITEX 2024 in 12 pavilions under the banner. The high-tech products on display include solutions and devices relating to Artificial Intelligence, Cybersecurity, Mobility, Sustainable Technologies, Fintech, Banking Solutions.

MIPCOM (21th-24th October 2024), France
The Council organized India's vibrant participation at MIPCOM 2024! From India, the participation was of 18 Indian companies exhibited from software sector. The event turned out be a grand success.

(K) Mobile and Electronic Devices Export Promotion Council (MEDEPC)
The Mobile and Electronic Devices Export Promotion Council (MEDEPC) has made dynamic strides in 2024-25, strengthening its commitment to promoting Indian exports of mobile devices and electronic products while addressing significant challenges in the global market. This year's report highlights MEDEPC's key initiatives, collaborations, and policy support activities aimed at advancing the interests of our members and driving India's export growth in the electronics sector.

(i) Export Performance and Industry Growth

In 2024-25, India's electronic goods exports reached an impressive US$19.07 billion (April-October 2024), with smartphone exports alone contributing US$10.68 billion (April-October 2024). This success underscores the critical role that Indian mobile phone manufacturers have played in positioning the country as a global leader in smartphone exports. Building on this momentum, MEDEPC is now turning its attention to other high-potential segments, such as laptops, air conditioning units, and smartwatches.

With the introduction of the PLI IT Hardware 2.0 scheme, MEDEPC is engaging with laptop manufacturers to replicate the success seen in the smartphone sector. Additionally, in collaboration with industry associations, we are exploring ways to expand air conditioner exports and support manufacturers in entering new markets. The smartwatch industry is another focus area, where we are working with Indian manufacturers to address challenges and enhance their competitive edge internationally.

(ii) Key Initiatives and Collaborations

MEDEPC has spearheaded numerous initiatives to boost the export of mobile and electronic devices, collaborating closely with industry bodies, trade associations, and government agencies:

Collaboration with ELCOMA: In March 2024, MEDEPC held a significant meeting with the Electrical Lamp and Component Manufacturers Association of India (ELCOMA). This partnership enabled us to identify barriers to exports within the lighting industry and develop actionable strategies to drive export growth in this sector.

Advocating Policy Reforms: MEDEPC has been an active advocate on policy issues affecting electronic and mobile exports. Collaborating with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), we've supported initiatives around regulatory reform, exporter incentives,

and streamlined customs processes. We have also contributed to discussions on Free Trade Agreements (FTAs), ensuring Indian exporters' interests are well-represented in these trade negotiations.

Promoting FDI for Component Manufacturing: MEDEPC continues to advocate for a time-bound approval process for Custom Direct Investment (FDI) to establish a robust component manufacturing ecosystem. Our efforts aim to reduce import dependence, enhance local manufacturing, and streamline the issuance of Indian visas for technical personnel, enabling smoother technology transfers and plant setups.

Customs and IGST Reforms: In response to MEDEPC's recommendations, the government reduced customs duties on critical components, per Custom Notification 9/2024 (dated 30th January 2024). MEDEPC has also championed the call for an IGST exemption under the Manufacturing and Other Operations in Warehouse Regulations (MOOWR) scheme. This exemption will be pivotal in maintaining cost competitiveness for Indian exporters.

MEDEPC remains committed to addressing the needs of all members, advocating for improved export procedures, resolving operational issues, and representing them effectively before relevant authorities.

(iii) International Engagements

MEDEPC represented India in several key international events, showcasing Indian innovations and expanding market opportunities for our members:

GitEX Africa 2024: Held in Marrakesh, Morocco, from 29th to 31st May, this event allowed MEDEPC's delegation to present India's advancements in manufacturing and electronic innovation across the WANA and African regions. This platform fostered connections and offered insights into market demands for AI, IoT, cybersecurity, digital finance, and healthcare technology.

Expand North Star 2024, Dubai: MEDEPC organized the India Pavilion under the MAI grant, hosting 41 exhibitors at Dubai's largest th th
startup event from 13-16 October 2024. This 
participation demonstrated India’s leadership 
in AI, fintech, IoT, and digital health and 
highlighted the nation’s contribution to global 
digital transformation.

$$
1 3 ^ {\mathrm {t h}} - 1 6 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

$$
\mathrm {A I},
$$

(L) EEPC India

EEPC India is the Council set up under the aegis of 
Department of Commerce for promoting exports 
in the Engineering sector. It is a company set 
up under Section 25 of the Companies Act 1956 
(company not for profit), keeping in view the special 
requirement of the Indian Engineering Sector for 
export promotion. EEPC India is the nodal agency for 
issue of Registration-cum- Membership Certificate 
for engineering exports throughout the country 
under the provisions of the Foreign Trade Policy. 
The organization has its headquarters at Kolkata 
with regional offices in Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata 
and Delhi and sub- regional offices in Ahmedabad, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad (Secunderabad) and Jalandhar 
for providing services to exporters of engineering 
products. With a view to establish closer connections 
with the engineering manufacturers & exporters and 
to have a better reach, EEPC India has also opened 
its chapters in 15 Tier II/Tier III cities spread across 
the country.

(i) Engineering Exports Scenario

As an advisory body, it actively contributes to 
the policies of Government of India and acts as an 
interface between the engineering industry and the 
Government. Set up in 1955, EEPC India now has 
a membership base of around 9500 out of which 
around 60 per cent are SMEs. EEPC India facilitates 
sourcing from India and boosts the MSMEs to raise 
their standard at par with the international best 
practices. It also encourages the SMEs to integrate 
their business with the global value chain. Keeping 
‘Engineering the Future’ as the motto, EEPC 
India serves as the reference point for the Indian 
engineering industry and the international business 
community in its efforts towards establishing India as 
a major engineering export hub.

India’s total merchandise exports. Within the sector, 
MSME sector accounts for 35-40 per cent of the total 
exports.

India’s engineering exports stood at US$ 75.47 
billion in April-November 2024 viz-a-viz US$ 
69.32 billion during the same period last fiscal, 
registering a positive growth of 8.87 per cent. Share 
of engineering exports to total merchandise exports 
was 26.87 per cent during April-November 2024 as 
compared to 24.91 per cent during the same period, 
last year. During April-November 2024, 27 out of 
34 engineering panels exhibited a positive year-onyear growth. The panels which registered significant 
growth in exports during the April-November 2024 
vis-a-vis April-November 2023 were Aircrafts and 
Spacecraft parts and products (growth of 264 per 
cent), Tin and products (growth of 45 per cent), Ships 
Boats and Floating products and parts (growth of 37 
per cent), Lead and products (growth of 24 per cent), 
Two and Three Wheelers (growth of 20 per cent), 
Industrial Machinery like Boilers, parts, etc. (growth 
of 19 per cent) and  Electrical Machinery (growth of 
16 per cent).

Region wise, North America and European 
Union remained India’s topmost destinations for 
engineering exports with share of 20.2 per cent and 
17.1 per cent respectively, in India’s total engineering 
exports during April-November 2024. WANA 
registered highest growth of 25.3 per cent during 
April-November 2024 vis-à-vis the same period last 
year followed by ASEAN (growth of 14.7 per cent) 
and CIS (growth of 11.5 per cent).

During April-November 2024, USA, UAE, Saudi 
Arabia, Singapore, and Germany were the top five 
exporting destinations.

To accelerate exports by enhancing brand image of 
“Made in India” engineering quality and capabilities 
of Indian engineering products and services, EEPC 
India, under the aegis of Department of Commerce, 
is undertaking Brand “India Engineering” campaign 
since 2014. The initiative is implemented with the 
support of India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF), 
a Trust under Department of Commerce. In April- 
November 2024, EEPC India was supported by IBEF th
for campaigning Brand “India Engineering” for the 12
edition of International Engineering Sourcing Show 
(IESS). IBEF is also supporting EEPC for campaigning 
Brand “India Engineering” for the Bharat Mobility 
th
Global Expo 2025, scheduled to be held during 17-
nd
22 January 2025.

EEPC India also plays a leading role in building 
Brand India image by organizing exhibitions around 
the globe. International Engineering Sourcing Show 
(IESS) became the latest concept in marketing Brand 
India across the world. The XII edition of the event 
th th
was held in Chennai in 27-29 November 2024 
with participation of over 300 exhibitors and 300 
overseas buyers.

With a view to popularize ‘Made in India’ brand image 
in the overseas markets, EEPC’s publicity programme 
includes screening of Council’s film titled ‘Made in 
India’ at various Seminars/Conferences, Buyer-Seller 
Meets and International Exhibitions, highlighting 
the industrial image of India. Copies of this film are 
distributed amongst Chambers of Commerce and 
Trade Associations, both in India and abroad, Indian 
missions in identified thrust market and foreign 
missions in India.

(iii) Initiative for Technology Upgradation for 
Boosting Engineering Exports

v	 EEPC India Technology Centre has provided 
various Technological solutions to their MSME 
members by Additive Technology and Reverse 
Engineering through initiatives taken up by 3D 
Design and Development Centre.

Department of Commerce, in partnership with EEPC 
India, has been attempting to devise ways to move 
into higher technology space. One of the key initiatives 
is to enable upgradation of technology for boosting 
engineering exports. This is being attempted through 
bridging the gap between leading R&D Labs and 
industry for the development of cutting-edge exportoriented technologies. For this purpose, technology 
meets/industry- academia interactions are organized 
in specific industrial clusters to identify the products 
and processes for R&D support. The initiative aims 
to sensitize the industry about various Government 
schemes available for technology upgradation and 
implementing the technology development initiatives 
in consultation with the industry requirements, in a 
cluster-based approach.

v	 A number of Seminars/Workshops/Webinars/
Industry Meets were organized by EEPC India 
to empower MSMEs with the latest knowhow of advanced technologies, enable value 
addition of products and to provide a platform 
to connect with engineering clusters in India 
and interact with leading Technological 
Experts and R&D labs and Academic Institutes 
across India.

v	 EEPC has signed MoUs with the following 
institutes/technology centres for Technical 
Cooperation:

Ø	 The Energy and Resources Institute 
(TERI), New Delhi to utilize their 
expertise and experience to aware the 
Indian MSMEs about conservation of 
energy, energy audit, green energy, 
compliances relating to carbon foot 
prints control, sustainability, etc. and 
provide consultancy and advisory 
services for the same.

Ø	 National Accreditation Board for Testing 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL), New 
Delhi to sensitize MSMEs members 
about accreditation process through 
workshops/seminars/awareness 
programs and disseminate information 
on latest regulation in terms of testing, 
inspection and calibration. 
Ø	 Institute for Auto Part and Hand

Ø	 Research and Development Centre 
for Bicycle and Sewing Machines

Ø	 Institute for Auto Part and Hand 
Tools Technology (IAHT), Ludhiana to 
leverage their expertise to bridge the 
technological gap and sensitize the 
Indian MSMEs about the related latest 
technologies through workshops/
seminars/industry meets and avail 
their facilities of testing, inspection and 
calibration for EEPC India members.

---

(RDCBSM), Ludhiana to utilize their 
knowledge and experiences to sensitize 
the Indian MSMEs about the related 
latest technologies through workshops/
seminars/ industry meets and avail 
their facilities of testing, inspection and 
calibration for EEPC India members.

EEPC India organized several events/seminars for 
technological upgradation and boosting India’s 
engineering manufacturing competitiveness and 
exports:

v	 Entrepreneurship and Engineering Start Ups in 
collaboration with leading industry experts in 
Kolkata

v	 Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) 
-Challenges and Solutions in collaboration with 
TUV SUD.

v	 Empowering Tomorrow and Shaping the Future 
collaboration with National Accreditation 
Board for Testing Calibration Laboratories 
(NABL) in Kolkata

v	 Enhancing Global Market Reach for Indian 
Engineering Sector collaboration with CSIR-
Central Mechanical Engineering Research 
Institute (CSIR-CMERI), Centre of Excellence 
for Farm Machinery (CoEFM), Ludhiana in 
Jalandhar
v	 Green Welding Practices and Impact of Robotic

v	 Department of Commerce undertakes various 
export promotion activities through EEPC India. 
These activities include organizing International 
Engineering Sourcing Show  (IESS) , Bharat 
Mobility Global Expo and product - specific 
Seminars/Conferences, Export Awareness 
Programmes etc. in India, organizing exclusive 
India  Engineering  Exhibitions  (INDEEs) 
outside  India, participation in various

v	 Green Welding Practices and Impact of Robotic 
Arc Welding Automation amongst Engineering 
MSMEs in collaboration with Indian Institute of 
Welding (IIW), India

(iv) Export Promotion Activities

product - specific international exhibitions, 
etc. to demonstrate the capabilities of Indian 
engineering industry and to provide the 
overseas buyers with true value as propagated 
by Brand “India Engineering”. Participation in 
global trade exhibitions enable Indian exporters 
to showcase their innovations to a broader 
audience, fostering valuable partnerships and 
opening doors to new markets.

v	 International Engineering Sourcing Show 
(IESS): It is the flagship event in the engineering 
sector, and is considered to be the largest 
sourcing show organised within India for the 
engineering products, particularly for MSMEs. 
The XII edition of the event was held in Chennai 
th th
in 27-29 November 2024 with participation 
of over 300 exhibitors and 300 overseas buyers. 
Advocating #SmartSustainableEngineering as 
the theme, this event aimed to minimize the 
environmental impact of manufacturing at the 
product cycle, from resource extraction and 
production to product use and disposal.  
v	 Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2025

v	 Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2025

Ø	 The second edition of Bharat Mobility 
Global Expo, 2025 was organized from 
17-22 January, 2025 on a much larger 
scale across three venues in Delhi NCR 
viz, Bharat Mandapam (ITPO), Delhi; 
Yashobhoomi (India International 
Convention and Expo Centre), Dwarka; 
and India Expo Centre & Mart, Greater 
Noida.

Ø	 The Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2025 
is an industry led event and supported 
by Ministry of Commerce & Industry and 
Ministry of Heavy Industries. The Expo 
was coordinated by Engineering Export 
Promotion Council India (EEPC India) 
with the joint support of various industry 
bodies and partner organizations– SIAM, 
ACMA, IESA, ATMA, ISA, NASSCOM, 
ICEMA, AICMA, MRAI, ITPO, Invest India, 
IBEF, CII, Yashobhoomi and IEML.

---

Ø	 The Expo underscored India’s 
commitment to reshaping global 
mobility with a focus on innovation, 
sustainability, and inclusivity. The Expo 
saw a gathering of industry experts, 
policymakers, government officials, 
business leaders, and innovators 
deliberating how mobility can catalyze 
growth, bridge disparities, and protect 
our environment.

Ø	 A total of 1,500 exhibitors participated, 
and 239 launches, including vehicle 
launches, auto components, construction equipment and more, took place 
during the Expo. The Expo showcased 
technologies and products of Indian 
companies that are setting a global 
benchmark in mobility solutions.

v	 During the year EEPC also participated in other 
major internationally acclaimed engineering events, viz., Hannover Messe, 2024, Germany- 
the leading industrial trade fair; FEIMEC 2024, 
Sao Paulo, International Fair of Machine 
Tools and Equipment; CWIEME, 2024, Berlin, 
Germany- the leading trade fair for coil winding, 
transformer, generator and electric motor 
manufacturing, and e-mobility; Agritechnica 
Asia, 2024, Bangkok, a premier trade fair for 
agricultural technology and innovation in 
Asia; JIMEX, 2024, Amman, Jordan- a leading 
Industrial Engineering Event; SUBCON, 2024, 
Birmingham, UK- the UK’s largest subcontract 
manufacturing supply chain show; ACHEMA, 
2024, Frankfurt, Germany- the leading show 
for the process industry; Arab Pharma, 
2024 Amman, Jordan- region’s largest & 
premier exhibition on comprehensive Pharma 
Manufacturing; Eurobike, 2024,Germany- 
the world’s biggest cycling trade show; 
International Fastener, 2024, USA- North 
America’s largest fastener event for all types 
of fasteners, machinery & tooling, and other 
industrial products; Automechanika Frankfurt, 
2024, Germany- a leading international 
trade fair for the automotive industry; Elmia 
Subcontractor 2024, Sweden- Europe’s leading 
subcontractor fair.

v	 EEPC organized two virtual events viz., 
Indian  Railways  Sourcing  Week 4.0, 2024 
- a premier virtual event dedicated to 
connecting Indian engineering companies 
with  Railways  procurement needs; India 
MSME Defence Week, 2024 - a webinar series 
with MSMEs, Defence Startups, Innovators & 
Entrepreneurs, Existing & Potential Vendors & 
Suppliers to Defence Sector, MSMEs seeking 
Defence Technologies, MSMEs exploring Export 
& International collaboration opportunities, 
Industry Professionals, Traders and Businesses.

Indian Primary Copper Producers Association 
(IPCPA), Society of Indian Automobile 
Manufacturers  (SIAM), Automotive Component 
Manufacturers Association (ACMA) from 
the Auto industry, Indian Machine Tool 
Manufacturers’ Association  (IMTMA), Textile 
Machinery Manufacturers Association (TMMA) 
and Refrigeration & Air-Conditioning Trades 
Association Ltd. (RATA).

v	 Extending its regular agenda, EEPC India also 
published several reports/studies to make the 
members aware about the international trends 
and opportunities in order to enhance their 
global footprints.

(M) Services Export Promotion Council (SEPC)

Major Promotional activities/events undertaken by 
SEPC during 2024 - 2025 are as follows:

v	 SEPC organized International Legal Conference 
th
on 20 April 2024 at Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi with the theme The Legal dimensions of 
Global Trade @ 2047. Conference was aimed 
at exploring challenges faced by Indian legal 
practitioners, both under domestic laws and 
foreign regulations, and to identify strategies 
for the legal sector to catalyze India’s crossborder trade in legal services.  
v	 SEPC, with the support of Department of

v	 SEPC, with the support of Department of 
Commerce, Government of India, organized an 
India pavilion in the International Educational 
Service Sector Event i.e. Global Education & 
th th
Training Exhibition (GETEX), held from 24-26
April 2024, at Dubai International Convention 
& Exhibition Centre, Dubai, UAE.

v	 SEPC, in association with Carbon Manufacturers 
Association of India (CMAI), organized a 
Business Delegation to Baku, Azberbaijan from 
th th
6-9 May 2024 and held discussions with 
stakeholders including diplomats, industry v	 SEPC participated in IGNITE Maharashtra 
th
(2.0) 2024 on 11 July 2024, an initiative of 
Directorate of Industries, Government of 
Maharashtra and presented benefits of SEPC 
for Service Exporters.

v	 SEPC organized a Round Table discussion 
nd
meeting on Gaming Industry held on 2
August 2024 at Hyderabad.

v	 SEPC organized an India Pavilion at Gamescom 
th th
from 19-24 August 2024 and participated in 
Devcom Conference at Cologne, Germany.

v	 SEPC organized a one-day National Conference 
on Transforming Higher Education and Skilling 
th
Towards Viksit Bharat@2047 28 September 
IHC, New Delhi. The conference featured 
over 45 distinguished speakers from various 
institutions and industry and about 350 
delegates participated in the deliberations.

v	 SEPC along ESC and NASSCOM organized an 
India Pavilion at GITEX Global 2024 at Dubai 
th th
from 14-18 October 2024 with participation 
of over 400 Indian Companies including Start-
Ups.

v	 SEPC participated in Word Travel Market 2024 
th th
from 5-7 November 2024 at London, UK 
and by mobilizing more than 50 companies 
including inbound tour operators, airlines 
and hoteliers from the Indian Travel Industry 
to showcase India’s vibrant cultural diversity 
and the vast range of tourism products and 
immersive experiences.

mobilized participation of companies in M&E 
sector.
v	 SEPC organized third edition of conclave on 
Global Services Export Conclave (Hybrid Mode) 
on “Design, Engineering, Construction, R&D 
and Environmental Services: Infrastructure, 
Space, Energy (incl. Nuclear) and Defence” on 
th
29 October 2024.
v	 SEPC participated in Word Travel Market 2024

Webinars

v	 Work for webinar “Framework of Export Trade 
Finance Schemes - Cost Reduction Approach 
th
was held on 10 June 2024.

v	 SEPC organized a webinar on “Global Economic 
Outlook & Hedging Solutions for Managing 
th
Forex Risk” on 11 July 2024.

(N) Indian Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion 
Council (IOPEPC)

The Indian Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion 
Council (IOPEPC) has a storied history that began 
in 1956 as the Indian Oilseeds & Produce Exporters 
Association (IOPEPA). It was formally recognized 
as an Export Promotion Council by the Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry, Government of India, in 2006. 
While export promotion remains central to its mission, 
IOPEPC plays a pivotal role in fortifying India’s 
domestic Oilseed supply chain, collaborating closely 
with farmers, shellers, processors, and exporters to 
elevate quality standards nationwide.

Driven by a commitment to foster self-reliance 
in Oilseed and Oil production, IOPEPC works to 
reduce dependency on imports by promoting 
excellence in quality and processing. To achieve 
this mission, IOPEPC has formalized Memorandums 
of Understanding (MoUs) with leading agricultural 
institutions such as the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research - Indian Institute of Oilseeds Research 
in Hyderabad, the International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), and 
the Directorate of Groundnut Research in Junagadh. 
These partnerships enhance innovation, research, 
and best practices in the Oilseed sector.
The Council undertakes numerous initiatives to

The Council undertakes numerous initiatives to 
support its members and the industry, organizing 
awareness programs and training to elevate quality 
in Oilseed exports. IOPEPC also conducts market 
studies to facilitate access and resolve trade barriers 
with government support. Through buyer-seller 
meets and participation in international trade shows, 
the Council actively promotes trade while maintaining 
comprehensive data and statistics for the Oilseed 
sector. Additionally, it assesses government policies 
to provide strategic insights to its members and 
shares vital market intelligence through research 
reports and crop surveys.

---

Through these ongoing efforts, IOPEPC strengthens 
India’s Oilseed value chain, fosters collaboration 
across sectors, and promotes a sustainable ecosystem 
for the growth and prosperity of the industry.

Trade Promotion and Trade related activities 
undertaken in 2024-25

The Indian Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion 
Council (IOPEPC) remains steadfast in its commitment 
to fostering growth and development within the Oilseeds 
sector. Through a series of targeted capacity-building 
and educational initiatives, the Council aims to enhance 
the knowledge, skills, and the operational efficiency of 
both traders and farmers. During the fiscal year 2024-
25, the Council organized several key programs aimed at 
supporting the sector’s expansion and efficiency.

(i) Capacity Building and Educational Programs

v	 IOPEPC’s Participation in AICRP on Groundnut 
Annual Group Meeting (2024)

Annual Group Meeting (2024)
IOPEPC participated in the Annual Group Meeting 
(AGM) of the All India Coordinated Research Project 
(AICRP) on Groundnut, held at the Rajasthan 
Agricultural Research Institute, Durgapur, Jaipur, 
th th
Rajasthan, from 10-12 April 2024. During the event, 
IOPEPC shared valuable insights on the export of 
Oilseeds and Oils from India.

v	 IOPEPC formalized a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the China 
Chamber of Commerce of Foodstuffs, Native 
Produce, and Animal By-products (CFNA)

Shri. Khushwant Jain, Chairman, Convenor Groundnut and 
Groundnut Oil Panel and Director IOPEPC at Annual Group Meeting (AGM) of All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on 
Groundnut

Sesame Conference (Spring) held in Qingdao, China, 
th
on 16 April 2024. During the conference, IOPEPC 
formalized a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
with the China Chamber of Commerce of Foodstuffs, 
Native Produce, and Animal By-products (CFNA). 
This MOU marks a significant step in strengthening 
collaboration between the organization, with a 
focus on the Oilseeds sector. The agreement aims to 
enhance mutual interests and create synergies that 
will benefit both parties. It will facilitate the exchange 
of market insights and information, supporting Indian 
exporters in refining their strategies for exporting key 
commodities such as Sesame Seeds and Groundnuts 
to the Chinese market.

Shri Rutuparna Dole, Chairman, IOPEPC signing MoU on “Strategic Cooperation Agreement” with Ms Chen Ying, Director of Cereals and Oils Department, China Chamber of Commerce for IMP 
and Exp of Foodstuffs Native Produce and Animal By-Products. 
(CFNA)

v	 IOPEPC’s Capacity Building Programs and 
Trade Meetings in Rajkot and Kolkata (2024)

As part of its ongoing efforts to support the growth 
and development of the Oilseeds sector, IOPEPC 
organized two significant capacity-building programs 
and trade meetings in 2024. The first event took 
th
place in Rajkot on 4 May 2024 followed by a similar 
th
gathering in Kolkata on 16 June 2024. These events 
were designed to provide valuable opportunities for 
traders and industry stakeholders to enhance their 
understanding of industry best practices, explore 
emerging market opportunities, and engage with key 
experts and influencers.

---

yield forecasts and production trends. This data-driven 
approach helps industry professionals make informed 
decisions, optimize trade strategies, and better 
understand the dynamics of the Oilseeds market.

Trade Meeting at Rajkot: From Left to Right: - Shri Sanjiv Sawla, Past Chairman and Director IOPEPC, Shri Sanjay Shah, Past 
Chairman and Director IOPEPC, Shri Jay Chandarana, Honorary 
Secretary and Director IOPEPC, Shri Rutuparna Dole, Chairman 
IOPEPC, Shri Kishore Tanna, Past Chairman and Director IOPEPC, 
Shri Rajesh Bheda, Past Chairman and Director, IOPEPC, Shri 
Khushwant Jain, Past Chairman and Director IOPEPC

v	 Participation in Meeting on Strengthening 
Supply Chain and Risk Mitigation in Peanut 
Exports

IOPEPC participated in a key meeting organized by 
the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
th
Development Authority (APEDA) on 9 May 2024, 
focused on “Strengthening of Supply Chain and Risk 
Mitigation in Peanut Export.” The meeting was aimed to

Trade Meeting at Kolkata (L to R) Prof. D. K. Swain, IIT Kharagpur, 
Prof H. N. Mishra, IIT Kharagpur, Shri Ashok Agarwal from Edible 
Agro India, Shri Sanjay Shah, Convener Crop Survey and Director 
IOPEPC, Shri Mukul Gupta, Joint Convener of the Sesame Seeds 
and Sesame Seeds Oil Panel, Shri Nilesh Vira, Immediate Past 
Chairman and Director IOPEPC, Shri Vishal Agarwal, Edible Agro 
India

raise awareness about the export process for Peanuts 
and Peanut products, while addressing the challenges 
and obstacles faced by stakeholders in the export value 
chain. IOPEPC representatives shared their insights and 
expertise, contributing to the discussions on improving 
the export landscape for Peanuts.

v	 Engagement in MSME Export Facilitation 
Centre Proposal

As part of the MSME initiatives under the “Viksit 
Bharat” program, IOPEPC participated in a virtual 
th
meeting held on 10 May 2024, regarding the 
establishment of an Export Facilitation Centre at 
the National Institute of MSME in Hyderabad. The 
meeting, organized by the Additional Secretary and 
Development Commissioner (AD&DC) of the Ministry 
of MSME, brought together representatives from 
various export promotion councils, including IOPEPC. 
The objective was to gather expert inputs for the 
layout plan and operational strategy of the proposed 
Export Facilitation Centre, aimed at supporting 
MSMEs in enhancing their export capabilities.

$$
1 0 ^ {\mathrm {t h}}
$$

v	 Launch of IOPEPC’s New Website and 
Enhanced Digital Presence

th
On 25 July 2024, IOPEPC successfully inaugurated 
its newly revamped website, marking a significant 
step in enhancing its digital engagement with 
stakeholders and the wider Oilseeds export industry. 
The updated platform offers a more user-friendly 
interface, improved navigation, and easier access 
to the latest information about IOPEPC’s initiatives, 
services, and resources.

v	 IOPEPC Engages in High-Level Discussions 
with Thailand’s ACFS to Enhance Groundnut 
Export Standards

th
On 24 September 2024, IOPEPC participated in a 
high-level meeting with a delegation from Thailand’s 
National Bureau of Agricultural Commodity and Food

---

Safety Standards (ACFS) at the APEDA Head Office 
in Delhi. The meeting, chaired by APEDA’s Director 
(BEDF), focused on assessing and enhancing India’s 
quality control measures in peanut processing 
facilities to align with international standards.

During the discussions, IOPEPC shared valuable 
insights on the current state of India’s groundnut 
industry, highlighting key aspects of quality assurance. 
Additionally, IOPEPC emphasized the importance of 
fostering sustainable agricultural practices through 
direct engagement with farmers, ensuring the longterm competitiveness and compliance of India’s 
Groundnut exports with global market expectations.

Shri Sanjiv Sawla, former Chairman and current Director of IO-
PEPC, and Shri Tushar Thumar, Groundnut and Groundnut Oil 
Panel Member with Dr. Tarun Bajaj, Director (BEDF) APEDA and 
other APEDA officials along with the delegation from Thailand’s 
National Bureau of Agricultural Commodity and Food Safety 
Standards (ACFS) at the APEDA Head Office in Delhi

v	 IOPEPC Hosts the 6th Global Oilseeds 
Conference (IGOC) 2024

IOPEPC actively participated in the China 
International Peanut Conference 2024, organized 
by the China Chamber of Commerce for Import & 
Export of Foodstuffs, Native Produce, and Animal 
th th
By-products (CFNA) from 26-28 September 2024, 
in Xingcheng City, Liaoning Province, China. During 
the conference, IOPEPC presented a comprehensive 
overview of India’s peanut market, focusing on key 
aspects of groundnut production, export trends, and 
market opportunities. The conference also featured 
an insightful field visit to the Xingcheng National 
Peanut Planting Base and the Xingcheng Peanut 
Industry Park, where participants learned about 
advanced cultivation and processing techniques.

The Westin Goa. As a key annual event, IGOC serves 
as a critical platform for global stakeholders in the 
oilseeds sector to exchange ideas, explore emerging 
market trends, discuss regulatory changes, and 
address technological advancements.

Since its inaugural event in 2019, IGOC has grown 
in significance, consistently attracting top industry 
leaders, policymakers, and international delegates. 
Over 230 delegates attended IGOC 2024, which 
featured informative sessions focusing on the dynamics 
of the groundnut and sesame seed markets. Industry 
experts provided detailed analyses of supply, demand, 
and pricing trends, while panel discussions addressed 
both domestic and international perspectives on these 
key crops. Additionally, the conference presented the 
results of crop surveys for Groundnut and Sesame in 
key growing regions, offering valuable insights into 
production forecasts and trends.

This initiative reflects IOPEPC’s ongoing commitment 
to advancing the global Oilseeds industry by fostering 
collaboration, facilitating knowledge-sharing, and 
highlighting opportunities for growth and innovation 
across the sector.

L to R: Shri Sanjiv Sawla, Past chairman, current Director IOPEPC, 
Shri Rutuparna Dole, Chairman of IOPEPC, Guests of Honor: Shri 
Santosh Sarangi, Director General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry, Shri Abhishek Dev, Chairman of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), Shri. Jay Chandarana, Secretary IOPEPC, Shri 
Nilesh Vira, IPC, IOPEPC

v	 Certified Seeds and Quality Assurance

IOPEPC has advocated for the need to improve 
the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) and Varietal 
Replacement Rate (VRR) for Groundnuts and Sesame, 
which are currently below 25 per cent. The Council 
has raised concerns about the issues related to using stored seeds from the previous seasons and the sale 
of quality seeds under misleading labels (truthful 
label). These concerns have been communicated 
to the Ministry of Agriculture to seek solutions and 
improve seed quality and availability.
(iii) International Advocacy and Market Access

(iii) International Advocacy and Market Access

On the international front, IOPEPC has been active in 
advocating for favorable trade terms and expanded 
market access for Indian Oilseeds.

v	 Development of SOP for Sesame Seed Exports 
to the U.S.

IOPEPC has developed a Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for the export of Sesame seeds from 
India to the United States, in response to a formal 
request submitted to the Department of Commerce. 
This SOP mirrors the framework established for Sesame 
seed exports to the European Union, as per DGFT 
Notification No. 37/2015-20, to ensure consistency, 
regulatory compliance, and efficient trade practices.

The new SOP aims to standardize export procedures, 
improve regulatory adherence, and streamline the 
process, thereby enhancing trade between India 
and the U.S. It also supports the promotion of 
“BRAND INDIA” by ensuring that Sesame seeds meet 
international quality standards.
In accordance with DGFT Notification No. 38/2024-

In accordance with DGFT Notification No. 38/2024-
2025, IOPEPC has been authorized as the official 
certifying body for Sesame seed exports to the 
U.S. The notification, effective November 16, 2024, 
mandates that all Sesame seed shipments to the 
U.S. must be accompanied by an export certification 
issued by IOPEPC. This certification will involve a 
quality analysis performed by laboratories accredited 
by the National Accreditation Board for Testing 
and Calibration Laboratories (NABL), ensuring 
compliance with U.S. quality standards.

v	 India-Korea Trade Relations

the Oilseeds sector. One of the key arguments put 
forth includes the existing duty-free quota that China 
enjoys where they are permitted to export up to 
24,000 metric tons of Sesame seeds to Korea without 
incurring any import duties. IOPEPC has leveraged 
this comparison to demonstrate a clear disparity 
between the treatment of Indian Oilseeds and those 
from China, arguing that similar concessions should 
be extended to the Indian Oilseeds exports.

v	 Advocacy for Increased Peanut Butter Export 
Quota to the U.S.

IOPEPC has been actively advocating for an increase 
in India’s export quota for peanut butter to the United 
States. Currently set at 1,600 MT, IOPEPC is pushing 
for this quota to be raised to 3,200 MT, with the 
long-term goal of reaching 15,000 MT. Additionally, 
IOPEPC is contends for the reallocation of unused 
export quotas from other countries, such as Canada 
and Argentina, which have higher Peanut butter 
quotas, to be made available to India.

v	 Ind
…[truncated]